2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
 
Futurist Alvin Toffler identified information as the highest value commodity for the new 
millennium. He speculated that multinational corporate security departments might evolve 
into private armies to protect their company’s assets where host countries cannot. 
 
The world has indeed become a more complex and competitive place. Individual corporate 
organizations have become more powerful than some entire nations and the balance of 
economic power has shifted to the corporation, within which ideas and information have 
become the most highly prized assets — indeed, with more value than a company’s products 
or physical assets.  
 
To a considerable degree, businesses, administrations, and society as a whole have come to 
depend on the efficiency and security of information technology, resulting in information 
acquiring a new and distinct value that cannot be protected in the same way as  
tangible objects.  
 
Information exists in many forms, and its security is achieved by implementing a process of 
risk assessment and commensurate controls to ensure the preservation of: 
• Confidentiality, ensuring that information is accessible only to those authorized to have 
access, and that they can only use it for specified purposes; 
• Integrity, safeguarding the accuracy and completeness of information and processing 
methods; and 
• A vailability, ensuring that authorized users have access to information and associated 
assets when required. 
 
Intellectual property is a catch-all phrase. It is used here to denote knowledge-based assets 
and capital, including information but extending to ideas, designs, and innovations 
howsoever expressed or recorded. 
 
This chapter addresses the broad issues relating to the vulnerability and criticality of 
information and other intangible property. It advocates a mix of procedural, logical, and 
physical protective measures to combat threats posed by opponents who make it their 
business to try to obtain an advantage by illegally or unethically abusing intellectual property 
belonging to another. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.802                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Competitive Intelligence (CI) Versus Espionage 
History is used to the practice of intelligence, or what the Duke of Wellington described as 
“knowing what was over the other side of the hill.” Intelligence and espionage transferred 
from the military to a civilian setting with the return of service personnel from World War II 
and integrated itself with the economic environment through management education, which 
was focused on strategy and external influences.  
 
This approach to intelligence was formalized by one of the early proponents of business 
intelligence, Dr Gerald Albaum, who realized that companies had a need for a “more 
organized and systematic method for gathering, processing, analyzing, and reporting 
information about competitors.” 
 
CI has been defined as the analytical process that transforms disaggregated competitor data 
into relevant, accurate, and usable knowledge about competitors’ positions, performance, 
capabilities, and intentions. Yet in today’s market this is not enough. Companies are faced 
with three influencing factors: customers, competitors, and change. These forces are 
modifying the face of corporate strategy, driving the company of today deeper into 
unfamiliar and frightening territory. To address these fears, companies are now adopting 
organized business intelligence systems to monitor the environment in which they do 
business. 
 
CI is a legitimate business function that sits comfortably alongside marketing and research 
and development, as well as general business strategy and the newer discipline of knowledge 
management. It helps businesses to anticipate a competitor’s research and development 
strategy, determine its operating costs, pricing policies and financial strength, as well as its 
capacity. Knowledge about competitors is one of the advantages that can enable companies 
to succeed and lead the field in their respective market place. 
 
CI has become a growth industry that is practiced by professionals trained to use 
information in the public domain or to otherwise utilize legally available resources to 
compile information. This information is then collated, processed, and disseminated into 
intelligence that is usable and has strategic value. Gathering intelligence is not espionage, if 
the collection effort is done without recourse to criminal methods or intent. CI practitioners 
mostly work within a code of ethics drawn up by the Society for Competitive Intelligence 
Professionals (SCIP). This strict code includes the requirement that members identify 
themselves during an inquiry and do not use deception in their quest for such information.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.803 
To the detriment of the reputation of fraud examiners and CI professionals, certain private 
investigators and information brokers access financial and criminal information and other 
protected data, and generally disregard the laws governing data protection. Conversely, there 
are firms that will use quite aggressive techniques to investigate a client organization’s 
opponent. While not conforming to the SCIP’s code of ethics, these techniques are not 
illegal and firms using these methods appear to be prepared to stand by their techniques in a 
court of law. They provide a valuable service to their top-tier clients, many of whom do not 
believe that all evidence of malpractice is reflected solely in books and records. 
 
There is, therefore, a world of difference between competitive intelligence and espionage. 
Espionage may be defined as “intelligence activity directed toward the acquisition of  
information through clandestine means and proscribed by the laws of the country against which it is  
committed.” It does not cover legitimate intelligence collection and analysis using legal means. 
 
Espionage can be further sub-divided into industrial espionage and economic espionage 
Industrial espionage refers to the clandestine collection of information by companies and 
individuals, such as information brokers, about competitors. Economic espionage refers to 
state sponsored or sanctioned collection, which is often associated with a nation’s foreign 
intelligence service. 
 
 
Open Sources of Information 
Open source information is information in the public domain, or data that is legally available 
to anyone. Spies do not have to penetrate corporate security measures to obtain this type of 
information; it is available to anyone who wants to collect it. The term “public,” however, 
does not necessarily mean free. Many sources have access charges that may be simple low-
 cost copying fees or rather substantial database expenses.  
 
The dividing line between open source information and other targets of corporate 
intelligence (such as trade secrets) is the right to access. A member of the public can obtain 
open source data openly, without fear of legal consequences, and the provider of the data 
desires or has no objection to its release into the marketplace. Trade secrets are the exact 
opposite: no one but the owner has the right of access, and the owner has no desire to cast 
the trade secret freely upon the marketplace’s waters. The taking of trade secrets, without the 
owner’s permission, violates both state and federal law. Known as economic, industrial, or 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.804                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
corporate espionage, theft of trade secrets is a form of business intelligence that goes far 
beyond open source research. 
 
Most of the information sought on any topic, according to intelligence professionals, is 
publicly available. Estimates go as high as 95 percent as to what is discoverable in the  
public sector.  
 
There is only so much that security professionals can do to limit the open source 
information that is available on an organization. Some forms of information, such as 
financial statements of publicly traded companies, are legally required to be published. Other 
pieces of information such as product descriptions or job listings are posted out of business 
necessity. Corporate security professionals do not operate in a vacuum; the need to protect 
an organization’s secrets must always be ba lanced against the need or duty to publish 
information. One of the first things security prof essionals must do is realize that they cannot 
protect everything.  
 
With a thorough understanding of how CI practitioners use open source information, 
however, security officers can limit their company’s vulnerability to the disclosure of secrets 
through accident or negligence. The knowledgeable security professional will identify key 
information assets, then review the open source information that is available on the 
company from a spy’s perspective to see if the safety of those assets could be endangered. 
The security professional will also be able to work with other departments to limit or edit the 
information that is available on the organization so that no inadvertent gifts are made to 
potential intruders. Finally, if a theft of information should occur, understanding how open 
sources are used may help a security officer track down the perpetrator.  
 
Why Do Companies Resort to Corporate Espionage? 
If so much lies “out there,” why do people pay for industrial and corporate spies? Why do 
they bother with illegal methods? Why do companies not stick to standard research to learn 
what they need about their competitors, and why do they use intelligence agents and analysts 
instead of routine researchers? The answer to these questions is twofold. 
 
First, even if the intelligence gatherer adheres strictly to using only open sources, mere facts 
do not constitute intelligence or knowledge. Collecting raw data brings one only to the 
threshold of the process. Data must then undergo analysis to be turned into a useful 
product. Analysis involves summarizing, comparing, and explaining the data. The craft of 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.805 
intelligence lies in the ability of the provider to distill mountains of facts from diverse 
sources into a concise product that is actionable by its consumer. 
 
The term “actionable” means the product must have the depth, character, and quality on 
which an executive may base sound decisions. Merely knowing what one’s competitors are 
up to falls short of the mark. Good intelligence identifies the actions an executive should 
take to seize an opportunity or to diminish or eliminate a threat. It is good to know what the 
problem is, but far better to know how the problem can be solved. Even though open 
sources are available to the general public, organizations still utilize intelligence professionals’ 
skills to create actionable intelligence from the mass of public information.  
 
The second reason organizations utilize intelligence professionals is that the remaining five 
percent of needed information is proprietary. This last segment often becomes critical to 
competitive survival, and organizations or individuals are sometimes willing to sidestep the 
law to obtain it. Intelligence professionals know the “tricks of the trade” for gathering 
sensitive proprietary information that can give their clients a competitive edge.  
 
While legal protections exist for trade secrets and other proprietary information, smart 
organizations do not passively rely on the threat of civil actions or criminal penalties to 
protect their information assets. Rather, they take affirmative steps to erect their own 
security barriers around their critical proprietary information. Such barriers dramatically 
increase the costs, never mind the legal liabilities, of obtaining protected information.  
 
If a company or foreign intelligence service must have the trade secrets of a target to 
complete the information picture they are formulating, they must be willing to invest. In 
many cases, this means employing the services of intelligence professionals. Utilizing 
experience and training, the intelligence professional conducts a campaign or mission using 
secure methods to protect the collection effort, preventing legal repercussions for the client. 
 
There is a cost factor involved in intelligence gathering, which tends to keep companies and 
corporate spies from rushing into covert proprietary intelligence activity. A wise intelligence 
campaign will utilize open sources, at least initially, as much as possible. Only when the 
effort can go no further, and business needs dictate acquiring additional information, does 
intelligence gathering enter the proprietary realm. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.806                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Bootstrap Effect 
With an understanding of the intelligence process, it becomes clear that open sources play 
two important roles. They may in some cases provide all the basic intelligence a company 
needs. A skilled intelligence analyst uses logic and the principles of inference to summarize, 
compare, and explain any missing pieces. In other words, the company never has to venture 
on the high seas of espionage; it satisfies itself  in the safe harbor of open sources. It learns 
what it needs to know at low cost and by legal means. 
 
But if penetrating the proprietary realm becomes necessary, open source information 
provides a bootstrap for the covert effort. The more one knows about a subject, the easier it 
is to discover additional information on that subject. Open sources serve as the homework a 
corporate spy does prior to conducting covert operations in hostile territory. 
 
As any filmmaker knows, the more time spent in pre-production (which is relatively 
inexpensive), the less time and money will have to be dedicated to production (which is very 
expensive). The professional filmmaker does his homework before shooting a foot of film. 
Likewise, the professional corporate spy does not  just show up at the target’s factory at 3 
a.m., armed with a crowbar, clumsily trying to break into the facility. 
 
Instead, the effective spy obtains plans on the layout of the targeted plant in advance, notes 
what type of alarm system is in place, learns about any security patrols, and then devises an 
appropriate penetration plan. But unlike a common thief, the effective spy sets that plan 
aside and first considers other options—less blatant means that may exist to ferret out the 
sought-after information. The spy understands that information is a unique commodity, and 
the theft of information can be accomplished in a number of unique ways. Often, 
information can be stolen without the target realizing it; copies or photographs can provide 
access to sensitive facts without requiring the source documents or files to ever be removed 
from their owner’s control. Burglary, something the police understand and take great interest 
in, is not always the best way to steal information. 
 
 
The Intelligence Pyramid 
Leonard Fuld, in his landmark book, Competitor Intelligence, argues that open sources exist at 
three levels, forming an Intelligence Pyramid. At the base of the pyramid are Fundamental 
Intelligence Techniques, the second level is composed of Basic Sources of Information, and 
the final level is Creative Sources. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.807 
 
Fundamental Research Techniques 
The initial level of the Intelligence Pyramid is composed of Fundamental Research 
Techniques, which include researching articles in magazines, journals, or newspapers, and 
consulting industry guidebooks. These fundamental sources of information allow the spy to 
build a partial picture of the target, and, equally important, to develop checklists of the 
information needed to fill in the blank spaces. These checklists are very important, because 
no intelligence effort should proceed without precise goals. For a spy to be effective, he 
must know exactly what is sought. Vague expeditions for information will produce vague 
results, so a shopping list becomes an absolute must. A competitive intelligence (CI) 
professional may spend many hours meeting with a client discussing in exacting detail the 
specifics of the mission. If the client is not clear on the objective, clarifying that issue 
becomes the first order of business. 
 
Basic Sources 
After establishing clearly defined goals, the CI professional crafts a collection plan. In a well-
 organized intelligence-gathering plan, the CI professional moves up the pyramid, collecting 
additional information, while continuing to narrow the focus of his search. After exercising 
fundamental techniques, the second level of the pyramid involves accessing basic sources. 
These sources include some that are already familiar: 
• Government sources 
? SEC (from the EDGAR database, www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.808                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? 10-K annual report 
? 10-Q quarterly report 
? Proxy statements 
? 13-D major stock acquisitions 
? 14-D tender offers 
? State corporate filings 
? Corporate registrations 
? UCC filings 
? Regulatory filings, professional licensing, etc. 
? Officer/Director (O/D) database 
• Industrial reports and studies 
• Industry analyst reports  
• State industrial directories 
• Trade and business magazines 
• Statistical sources (example: Standard Rate and Data Service [advertising])  
• Trade associations (from the Encyclopedia of Associations and Directories in Print 
provided by Gale Industries)  
• Databases with stories: 
? Thomson Research (http://research.thomsonib.com) — 3,500 research reports are 
added to this source daily. 
? DataTimes—full text newspapers 
 
Government Sources 
SEC FILINGS 
Publicly traded companies are required to make certain filings with the SEC. These 
documents can be extremely helpful to the spy seeking to build a financial profile on the 
target. Information such as annual and quarterly reports on publicly traded companies can be 
accessed for free through the SEC’s EDGAR system at www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
 
Through this avenue, the spy can obtain the target’s Form 10-K, which contains the 
company’s income statement and balance sheet, information on its debt structure, foreign 
ownership, properties owned, subsidiaries, industry descriptions, depreciation, dilution, and 
other key business information. If the target company has filed for bankruptcy, been the 
target of a shareholder lawsuit, or been sued for patent infringement, this may also show up 
in the 10-K. Most publicly traded companies must also file 10-Qs, which are statements of 
quarterly income, earnings per share, etc. Ot her forms that are available from the SEC 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.809 
include proxy statements, which provide information on stockholder votes taken on key 
issues; and forms 13-D and 14-D, which indicate major movements in stock ownership that 
are pending. 
 
STATE CORPORATE FILINGS 
States require that companies that do business within their jurisdictions register each year 
with the state government, usually through the Secretary of State’s office. This requirement 
extends to all companies operating in the state, not just those that are publicly traded.  
 
Many Secretary of State websites have enhanced search capabilities for business 
organizations, including searching by entity name, and by name of the person listed as a 
registered agent, officer, or director of a corporation. This search capability allows an 
intelligence analyst to find all the companies within a state in which a person serves as an 
officer or as a director. A search can help the CI professional develop a family tree of the 
officer’s business interests. It becomes a useful tool for uncovering lesser-known or hidden 
connections between businesses. The financial strength of a targeted business often lies in its 
affiliates or subsidiaries, which rise to the surface in an officer/director search. 
 
INDUSTRIAL REPORTS AND STUDIES 
State and federal governments periodically issue industrial reports and studies on various 
industries ranging from appliance manufacturers to high technology companies. These 
studies provide statistical benchmarks useful to establish where a company stands in its 
industry. In addition, they help delineate the standards for evaluating successful companies 
in that industry. State industrial directories, special industry issues in magazines like Fortune 
and Forbes, and directories from trade associations serve the same function. 
 
Industry Analyst Reports 
There are a number of industry analyst reports that CI gatherers use to estimate unknown 
figures in a target’s balance sheet. The Standard Rate and Data Service, for instance, provides 
information on advertising rates that may help a spy benchmark the target’s expenditures on 
advertising, an indicator of the organization’s financial health. For practically any industry, a 
statistical source exists that serves as a powerful estimating tool for CI analysts. 
 
Industry analyst reports from investment firms, when properly researched and written, are 
akin to having a personal intelligence briefing about the target. Striving for a balanced 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.810                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
presentation, they aim to tell both the good and the bad about a company. They often 
contrast sharply with the company’s annual report.  
 
Electronic Sources 
Electronic sources of data are some of the most powerful research tools in the intelligence 
analyst’s arsenal. These resources, which include CD-ROMs and online databases, contain 
compilations of data on bankruptcies, new business filings, telephone directories, UCC 
filings, criminal records, corporate data, and many other types of information. If one 
includes the many local, regional, and national newspapers available electronically, the 
research capabilities of one intelligence analyst sitting at his computer are truly staggering. 
 
Large public or university libraries frequently provide free network access to newspaper, 
magazine, and other journalistic sources. More information about electronic sources is 
contained in the “Accessing Information Online”  chapter in the Investigation section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
MULTIPLIER EFFECT  
Analytical software produces a multiplier effect when processing case information. They 
generate output greater than the individual inputs of information. Facts A, B, C, and D 
standing by themselves may offer minimal insight, but when combined and organized those 
facts can generate an understanding of what is really going on in an organization. The 
Analyst’s Notebook by i2, for example, is popular among police intelligence analysts, 
because it can track patterns and linkages from large databases. (Further information about 
these types of products is contained in the “Data Analysis and Reporting Tools” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual .) 
 
The functions performed by analytical software programs can easily be translated to business 
intelligence needs, uncovering patterns related to corporate filings, O/D searches, patent and 
trademark applications, and other diverse compilations of data that, when pieced together, 
can indicate the potential direction in which a competitor is headed. For example, some 
software programs can be designed to cross check patent authors extracted from a patent 
database against an Officer/Director search to show the companies for which key scientists 
serve as directors. The software also generates visual displays of the relationships between 
the companies. All of this makes the corporate spy’s task of unearthing hidden relationships 
and confidential facts easier.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.811 
Creative Sources 
The final step in the open source intelligence pyramid is the use of creative sources. Leonard 
Fuld lists the following types of information as examples of creative sources: classified ads, 
environmental impact statements, close examination of UCC filings, proxies, and the 
building of financial statements.  
 
Classified Ads 
Employment advertisements, in particular, can provide valuable information about the job 
skills that a target company needs and the number of employees it is seeking to hire. This 
can help a spy infer what kinds of new projects are being developed within a company or 
where personnel resources are being devoted. Large-scale hiring could indicate that a 
competitor has signed or expects to sign a large contract. In some cases, employment ads 
also point out defections of key personnel.  
 
Employment ads also give a spy an indication of what the target company pays its 
employees. This could be valuable for the spy’s employer in recruiting battles for coveted 
personnel. It could also help the spy identify employees who may be susceptible to 
recruitment tactics because of low pay or a high rate of employee dissatisfaction (as 
evidenced by a high rate of turnover in a particular department).  
 
Environmental Impact Statements 
Environmental impact statements contain large amounts of historical, financial, and 
operational information. The company filing the statement not only has to supply this 
background data on itself, but it also has to explain its proposed project in detail. Those 
details on emissions, hazardous materials used, and possible accidents stemming from 
operations provide a wealth of facts for analysis by an expert. From such analysis a CI 
professional can develop an excellent picture on the size and operational capability of a plant 
or company. Very often, this kind of information can allow one’s competitors to establish 
the date operations will begin at a targeted plant. 
 
UCC Filings 
UCC filings, in addition to financial data previously discussed, provide operational details by 
describing equipment and materials that have been purchased or pledged for a loan. 
Sometimes previously unknown assets and ties to other businesses will be listed in the 
filings. UCC filings are made at the county level or with the Secretary of State, depending on 
the nature of the collateral provided as security in a financing agreement. Savvy intelligence 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.812                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
professionals review these documents with a fine-toothed comb for tidbits of information 
that can help them gain an understanding of a target’s business transactions. 
 
Proxies  
Developing proxies—people who work with the target on a day-to-day basis—helps CI 
professionals color in many necessary details. Suppliers in particular can be a rich source of 
inside information about a targeted business. Suppliers spend significant time and resources 
to learn about their customers. They know what a customer orders, when they place orders, 
how much they spend, how long they take to pay their bills, and what the business cycle of 
the customer’s industry is. Interviews with these persons can be an invaluable source of 
information for a corporate spy. 
 
Posing as a Customer 
If a spy cannot cultivate or bribe key employees of a supplier, he may pose as a customer 
himself. He can exploit the two fundamental axioms of corporate espionage: (1) all 
salespeople want to make a sale, and (2) all salespeople will do almost anything to make a 
sale, including talking their heads off about what they’ve done for other customers.  
 
In a prospective sales meeting, the spy, armed with business cards and even a brochure 
about his “company,” conveys that he works for a prosperous business. (He can even pick a 
legitimate business with a good D&B rating and pose as its employee.) During the course of 
the meeting, he can ask what the supplier has done for other customers. He will casually 
mention that he has a friend who works for the target company. How well has the supplier 
served that business? As an additional enticemen t, the spy can place on the table impressive-
 looking spreadsheets showing financial data and production run levels and ask if the target’s 
level of business matches these figures. The spy tells the salesperson that he just wants to see 
if the supplier has the experience necessary to handle his business. 
 
 
Building Financial Statements 
The one piece of information desired universally by consumers of intelligence is the financial 
statement. At times, the balance sheet becomes the Holy Grail, a magic key that opens all 
sorts of doors to understanding a business. Spies can, of course, steal balance sheets and 
other financial documents. But, often the theft is not worth the risk. Large publicly owned 
companies are required by law to publish their financial statements. This information is 
freely available on the SEC’s EDGAR database. Even large privately owned companies 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.813 
frequently leave enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figuring out their financial 
posture is not terribly difficult. More difficulty generally arises when the CI professional 
seeks to build a financial profile of private small- and medium-sized companies. The finances 
in these companies are usually held close to the vest. Getting in proximity to key financial 
documents may be risky given that a limited number of people in these companies have 
access. 
 
A much safer approach lies in estimating the balance sheet with research methods. Every 
good CI specialist knows how to perform this procedure. The technique forms a central tool 
in the intelligence professional’s arsenal. The process by which balance sheets are estimated 
affords an inside look at the open source process used by CI professionals. 
 
It is important to remember that the financial statements that the CI professional builds are 
nothing more than estimates of a target’s fi nancial status. Confirming those estimates by 
gathering further intelligence is an option, but the process begins as a refined, educated 
guess. While only a guess, a well-calculated estimate may provide all the information needed 
by the client, and this method involves a considerably lower degree of risk than outright 
theft of the sought-after information.  
 
The CI specialist must always be aware that financial statements tell only part of the story 
about a company. He knows to evaluate them in the light of other information such as the 
history of the business, the condition of its market, technological developments, and the 
condition of its suppliers. Quite frankly, estimating works best when done on manufacturing 
companies. The inputs and outputs of a manufacturing firm are easier to spot, track, and 
measure than with service companies. Service companies, however, can be compared to 
other similar businesses by size, location, and number of employees. If the financials of the 
similar company are known, then an educated inference can be made about the target’s 
financial statements. For the purposes of the discussion in this section, and in order to best 
illustrate the methods used by intelligence professionals, the hypothetical target will be a 
manufacturing company.  
 
How Income Statements Are Calculated 
To build the financials of a manufacturing firm, spies first calculate the income statement. 
They break down an income statement into three components: (1) revenue, (2) cost of goods 
sold, and (3) overhead.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.814                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Revenue Estimates 
Revenue estimates can come from state air pollution control permit applications, hazardous 
materials permit applications, articles in the local press about sales volumes, state industrial 
directories, or by indirect methods. One of the most common indirect methods for 
estimating revenue is to count truck activity at a site, both receiving and shipping, over a 
given period of time. Knowing the shipping dimensions and retail costs of the company’s 
products, a spy can estimate what each truck holds. The same goes for railcars and ships or 
barges. Talking to truck drivers, railroad personnel, and longshoremen can also fill in details 
on the size of outgoing loads and their frequency. In the service industry, revenue estimates 
are frequently made by conducting interviews with suppliers, customers, or employees of the 
target. Pretext calls and social engineering might also be used to trick employees into 
divulging key financial information.  
 
Costs of Goods Sold 
Labor costs can be derived by a spy from wages listed in newspaper classified ads and from 
wage surveys at the local chamber of commerce. The state workforce commission will also 
have wage surveys for certain occupations. The number of employees for the target can be 
gathered from OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) records and by 
counting cars in the parking lot for each shift.  
 
Determining indirect labor costs can be accomplished in several ways. The best method is to 
consult statistical manuals for the target’s ind ustry, which give the respective percentages of 
direct and indirect labor costs. In addition, estimating the numbers of managerial and 
professional workers entering the plant will supply a guideline. Spies look for clues such as 
the types of cars that employees drive (a Saab or a pickup truck?), the clothing they wear (a 
suit or overalls?), and the items they carry to work (briefcases and laptops or lunchboxes?). 
The chamber of commerce may also be able to supply the numbers of salaried personnel at  
a plant.  
 
The types and amount of raw materials used at a plant may be available from the state air 
pollution control board or the local fire department’s hazardous materials unit. Surveillance 
of truck deliveries to the site is another source. The cost of materials is available from 
suppliers or their catalogs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.815 
Overhead 
Overhead costs such as advertising derive from manuals discussed earlier such as the 
Standard Rate and Data Service. Calculating utility costs is as simple as calling the local 
electric, gas, or water company. While a utility company may not reveal what the target 
consumes directly, it will disclose what an average company of that size in that industry 
purchases annually. Newspaper ads and real estate brokers serve as sources on the costs of 
leased plant facilities. The local tax assessor can supply the value of property owned by the 
target. Mortgage information will be available from real estate records at the county clerk’s 
office. 
 
Debts of the targeted business emerge from researching UCC filings, bond rating manuals, 
state economic commission records (if the target is big enough), and from the state securities 
board file of privately placed prospectuses. 
 
How Balance Sheets Are Calculated 
From these various sources, a competitive intelligence analyst can compile a preliminary 
income statement. The elements of a balance sheet derive from the income statement with 
the help of financial tools, such as D&B’s Industry Norms and Key Business Ratios. The 
process of deriving the balance sheet begins by taking a known figure (for instance, sales) 
and looking up the ratio, for the target’s industry, between sales and net worth. The 
intelligence professional simply needs to do some simple algebra (divide the sales figure by 
the ratio) to derive the unknown, which is the net worth.  
 
A similar procedure works for other standard ratios. The rule of thumb is that if a person 
knows the annual sales, the line of business (LOB), the number of employees, and how long 
a company has been in business, then that person will be able to create a reasonable balance 
sheet estimate. An analyst will compare the estimate against known or published balance 
sheets of similar size companies in the same LOB to check accuracy. Consulting experts on 
the industry (bank loan officers, investment analysts) provides further confirmation. 
 
 
Nontraditional Sources 
A spy or intelligence analyst bolsters data developed from public records and estimated 
financial statements by accessing lesser-known sources. Historical archive centers like the 
Center for American History at the University of Texas at Austin have large collections of 
old telephone directories, industrial and corporate directories, and business reference works. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.816                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These materials enable a researcher to trace the history of a business or a person’s 
association with that business. They also serve to track the growth of a business over time. 
Changes in Yellow Pages listings, in telephone numbers, and in statistics in state 
manufacturing directories can be charted to show long-term trends for the business. These 
archives also document where a person served as an officer, as a key employee, or ran their 
own business. 
 
Thomson Gale, a publisher of many fine reference books, has two works of primary interest 
to CI specialists. Directories in Print has over 16,000 entries for every kind of directory 
imaginable, including business and industrial directories, professional and scientific rosters, 
foreign directories, and other lists and guides. Any good CI specialist knows that a good 
trade directory saves valuable research time. In addition, most directories generally run ads 
from suppliers to the industry, so the industry directory serves as an informal reference book 
for locating suppliers. These directories are also a strong way to do background research on 
an industry, and to learn the buzzwords and key concepts governing that business. After 
reviewing the directory, a spy will be able to talk like an insider. 
 
Thomson Gale also produces the Encyclopedia of Associations in regional, national, and 
international editions. From these works a CI specialist can locate experts and resources in 
almost any business field or manufacturing line. Contacting experts for interviews by 
telephone is a fast, inexpensive way to confirm estimates and research findings from open 
sources. The Encyclopedia  also lists annual meetings of organizations and their key officers. It 
serves as a source to identify experts, their trade shows, and related seminars. Savvy CI 
professionals will touch base with professionals prior to an annual meeting or seminar. They 
strike up a professional relationship in advance so when they meet at the convention, they 
are in a position to comfortably chat with targeted professionals and draw out key 
information. Virtually every text on competitive  intelligence mentions attending trade shows, 
but few mention doing the necessary homework before attending. Good spies do their 
homework on whom to contact by using Thomson Gale or similar sources as a starting 
point. 
 
InfoTrac 
Spies also do their homework by using InfoTrac, a large family of databases from Gale 
Research. One thing about these databases that makes them especially attractive to spies is 
that most libraries have them available in-house (usually on a CD-ROM network) for use at 
no charge. Since they index, abstract, and provide full text on hundreds of publications, the 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.817 
competitive intelligence researcher essentially has a multitude of field agents working for 
them. Keeping in mind the estimate that 95 percent of needed information lies in the public 
domain, InfoTrac’s databases form a good middle tier source. The information that InfoTrac 
commonly provides includes: 
• Number of employees 
• Manufacturing capacity 
• Product lines 
• Levels of expertise within the company 
• Markets 
• Market position 
• Key products 
• Internet participation 
• Product details 
• Competitive advantages 
 
 
A Closer Look at Databases 
There are three tiers of electronic databases: (1) The Internet, (2) InfoTrac databases and 
reference works like the Million Dollar Directory on CD-ROM, and (3) commercial 
databases such as Dialog, Profound, LexisNexis, and D&B (Dun & Bradstreet). 
 
Electronic Databases
 First Tier 
Examples:   
• The Internet 
Advantages:  
Quick, easy to use, usually free. 
Disadvantages:   
Chaotically organized, information 
not always current or reliable. 
 
Second Tier 
Examples:   
• InfoTrac 
• Million Dollar Directory 
• ACL 
Advantages:  
Fairly easy to use, available at large 
public libraries, usually free access, 
information reasonably reliable. 
Disadvantages:   
Expensive subscription rates, so 
not always practical as an in-house 
source for security units. 
 
 
Third Tier 
Examples:   
• Dialog 
• LexisNexis 
• D&B 
• Profound 
Advantages:  
Most use powerful search engines 
or have vast databases. Capable of 
highly refined conceptual searches. 
Disadvantages:   
Can be very expensive for 
intelligence and security units. 
However, these databases 
represent an emerging tool for the 
future. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.818                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
First Tier Databases 
Competitive intelligence involves more than just “surfing the Net.” Of course any CI 
specialist will be well acquainted with Web search engines like Google, Yahoo, Lycos, 
AltaVista, MetaCrawler, and Northern Light.  These engines are useful for locating the 
highlights on the Internet. However, with URLs constantly changing, and the quality and 
depth of data on the Internet being highly variable, the Internet is just a first step for CI 
work.  
 
Second Tier Databases  
As indicated above, more in-depth, cleaner, and better organized data lies in middle tier 
databases such as Infotrac. While hypertext linking on the Web affords the user the ability to 
establish his own pathways through information, this mode of searching often leads to 
haphazard, lengthy, and even chaotic journeys. Middle tier databases provide well-organized, 
carefully indexed data that takes less time to search and carries a greater informational 
punch. Because intelligence frequently has a short half-life, time can be a very critical factor 
for intelligence specialists. The more quickly a search is completed, the more valuable is the 
information obtained.  
 
Third Tier Databases 
Competitive intelligence campaigns frequently operate under a short time frame; finding out 
if a competitor is about to expand production, for instance, may only be valuable if the spy 
learns in time for his employer to beat that rival to the punch. Because time is frequently a 
critical factor in an intelligence campaign, analysts tend to use the third tier of databases as a 
central tool. Those employing the most sophisticated search technologies include Dialog, 
ChoicePoint, D&B, and LexisNexis. These databases are generally able to provide more 
useful information in less time than lower tier alternatives.  
 
Newsgroups
Spies also utilize search engines specifically geared to scanning newsgroups on the Internet. 
These sites can contain immense amounts of intelligence information. When people start 
chatting on the Internet, they frequently reveal a great deal about what they are working on. 
Examples of this type of search engine include Google (www.google.com) and Supernews 
(www.supernews.com). 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.819 
D&B and LexisNexis 
D&B’s and LexisNexis’s business and marketing databases employ conventional search 
technologies that both fall in the upper tier due to their vastness. A starting point for 
researching almost any business is a D&B report.  If the report is lacking, there is probably 
not much out there on that company. With millions of records, these databases are useful in 
developing histories and backgrounds on companies and officers. LexisNexis has so many 
periodicals and transcripts on its database that it is one of the best commercial intelligence 
databases in the world.  
 
i2  
As previously mentioned, i2 also figures into the database equation. It can perform pattern 
development functions similar to other top-level databases. The trend of doing more with 
open sources and squeezing additional information out of them is growing rapidly in the CI 
community. The multiplier effect, discussed earlier, is clearly at work. Information organized 
and cross-referenced internally generates knowledge that can help a client make a decision or 
that can support and enhance further intelligence efforts. 
 
Competitive Intelligence Websites 
In addition to the tools discussed above, CI professionals can utilize a number of websites 
that provide free information about how to conduct business intelligence operations. Many 
of these sites will take a visitor step-by-step through intelligence techniques and strategies.  
 
 
A Corporate Spy Uses Open Sources: What of It? 
A corporate spy uses some or all of the following open sources of information: 
1. Public records (regulatory, civil, criminal) 
2. Annual reports 
3. Telephone directories (internal and external) 
4. Analyst reports 
5. News accounts 
6. Magazine articles 
7. Constructed balance sheets 
8. Reference books 
9. Biographical sources 
10. Visual sightings and surveillance 
  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.820                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
11. Electronic databases and CD-ROMs 
12. Internet/Web 
 
All of these materials blend together to develop actual, actionable intelligence. In the 
alternative, they act as a springboard for gaining additional data. The question is, if all this 
data is out there by default, what can a company do about it? 
 
Certainly a company can educate its employees to be careful about what they say in public, 
put into print, or place on the Internet. Security training may also teach them to recognize 
pretext telephone calls designed to obtain inside information. It may also be beneficial to 
train employees on how spies use open sources to gather competitive intelligence on a 
business. Employees can be taught not to divulge proprietary data and to think before they 
speak. 
 
The reality, however, is that companies must operate in an open society, not a police state. 
The free exchange of ideas and information will be absolutely essential to 21st century 
commerce. The first step in protecting sensitive corporate information is to realize that a 
security manager, a security investigator, or an internal auditor cannot protect everything. In 
the words of John Keegan, the noted military historian, “to defend everything is to  
defend nothing.” 
 
A security professional must identify the key pieces of intellectual property belonging to the 
company. Those items whose compromise could cause grave harm to the business require 
utmost protection. Knowing the tools and paths in the open source sector a spy could use to 
cut a swath to this critical data will be essential if the security professional is to effectively 
protect it. From a security perspective, an investigator should try to exploit the available 
open sources himself to see if an avenue of attack can be completed. If so, the security 
professional can institute countermeasures before a loss occurs. 
 
If an information loss does occur, a security investigator or auditor can attempt to 
reconstruct a trail back to a possible spy with a sound knowledge of open source techniques.  
 
 
Favorite Targets 
Some of the favorite targets of intelligence gatherers include research and development, 
marketing, manufacturing and production, and human resources. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.821 
Research and Development 
One would think that research and development (R&D) would be the most heavily guarded 
department in a company, but access to R&D information is surprisingly easy. R&D 
personnel are almost always in the flow of information. The open exchange of information 
is part of the nature of their job. They participate in conferences, attend trade shows, and 
work with academic institutions; however, at each of these functions, they leave themselves 
open for intelligence spies to listen, mingle, and ask questions.  
 
Researchers who publish their findings in industry journals may inadvertently include details 
of a project on which they may be working. This is particularly true in the case of academic 
professionals who may be hired by a company to perform research or conduct a study. More 
than one company has been surprised to learn that the results of a supposedly confidential 
study were published in an academic journal. If an academician is hired to conduct research, 
make sure that he understands that the results are to be kept confidential. Also make sure 
that the use of teaching assistants or graduate students is kept to a minimum and that those 
individuals understand the confidentiality requirements.  
 
Marketing 
Insight into a company’s marketing plan is a valuable gift to a competitor. Being careless 
with vital information such as test marketing results, promotional strategies, and planned 
introduction dates can be disastrous. 
 
Manufacturing and Production 
Production managers are often good sources of information. Also, almost anyone answering 
the phone on the plant floor can unwittingly provide valuable information to a crafty caller 
from a competitor. 
 
Human Resources 
Intelligence professionals often pay close attention to help wanted ads, job postings, and job 
announcements. More ominously, they may use this information to arrange a job interview 
to get information about the firm and what the job will entail. 
 
Although the departments listed above are some of the favored targets of information 
thieves, other personnel in an organization can provide enormous amounts of useful 
information. For instance, salespeople like to talk and are an excellent source of information 
on pricing, product innovations, and market programs. Purchasing agents are helpful in 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.822                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
divulging suppliers, information about what is selling, and the costs of raw materials and 
services. 
 
 
How Information Is Lost 
Information thieves utilize a wide variety of methods—some legal, some not—to gain access 
to an organization’s business secrets. There are seven common ways for information to fall 
into the wrong hands. They are:   
• Accident  
• Poor information security procedures   
• Recruited spies  
• Deception techniques 
• Physical penetration of the company   
• Surveillance 
• Computer system penetrations  
 
Accident  
Accidental losses of information are fairly common and occur in a number of ways. 
Publications such as newsletters or reports to shareholders that are printed by a company 
can inadvertently provide valuable information to its competitors. Also, speeches or papers 
that are presented at conferences are a danger point. Organizations should implement a 
system of review whereby technical and/or security staff review in advance all works up for 
publication or presentation. Another common source of accidental leaks is the press. 
Executives eager to brag about their companies often reveal more than they should about 
research, new products, sales levels, and so on. 
 
A company’s website may also be a source of accidental leaks. Corporate spies frequently 
visit the websites of their targets to gather information that these companies have 
unknowingly assembled for them. Information such as employee telephone and e-mail 
directories, financial information, biographical data on key employees, product features and 
release dates, details on research and development, and job postings can all be found on 
many corporate websites. In some cases this information gives an information thief direct 
access to company secrets; in other instances it helps the spy build a profile of his target that 
will be the basis of an intelligence campaign. Businesses should pay attention to the 
information that is placed on their websites and in other marketing materials. As a general 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.823 
rule of thumb, anything that does not forward the marketing mission of an organization 
should be removed.  
 
Poor Information Security Procedures 
Companies that do not have a system in place for protecting and disposing of confidential 
information leave themselves wide open to attack by corporate spies. An information thief 
will generally attack one or more of the following areas: manual systems (hardcopy 
documents), computer-based systems (electronic files), or personnel (people employed by a 
company or associates of the business). Below are a number of techniques that companies 
should implement to protect manual and electronic information.  
 
On-Site Materials that Are Targeted 
Spies attempt to gather manual systems information by gaining surreptitious access to a 
target’s premises. Common methods include posing as a temporary employee, as a vendor, 
or as a visitor on a plant tour. Materials that these spies generally target include the 
following:   
• Archives (financial, sales data, marketing) 
? In print form 
? Stored on computer media 
• Draft documents, formal documents, and internal correspondence lying on desks 
• Scrap paper in wastepaper baskets and by copying machines 
• Minutes of meetings 
• Legal and regulatory filings 
• Computer printouts 
• Travel documents and receipts 
• Patent documents 
• Pending lawsuits 
• Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions 
• Licensing and franchise agreements 
• Special management reports 
• Audits of Internet access 
• Billings for database access 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.824                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ARCHIVES 
Archives provide a view of the target’s performance over time. They offer an excellent 
source for trend analysis. Even if a visitor on a plant tour is not able to handle documents, 
he can note their location and availability for a later penetration. 
 
DRAFT DOCUMENTS 
Draft documents, internal correspondence, and resulting formal documents may reveal the 
evolution of products, designs, and marketing plans within a company. 
 
SCRAP PAPER 
Paper thrown away often contains valuable information about preliminary plans and reports. 
Hackers “dumpster dive” for this sort of information all the time. Often in the form of 
manuals, technical specifications, and instructions, these discarded documents can provide a 
road map to penetrate computer systems. They can also provide insight into evolving 
products or business plans of a target.  
 
MINUTES OF MEETINGS 
Records of high-level meetings can provide key insight on corporate strategies, investment 
policies, product development plans, marketing plans, and other crucial information about a 
business’s direction. They can also help the spy identify key employees; possibly even those 
who are unhappy with the current direction of their own company or careers and who, 
therefore, might be potential recruits as spies.  
 
LEGAL DOCUMENTS AND REGULATORY FILINGS 
Legal documents range from trade secrets to pe nding litigation to summaries of regulatory 
problems the company faces. Pending lawsuits often detail problems with the company’s 
products, services, or operations. 
 
Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions have obvious commercial value. The same 
goes for licensing and franchise agreements. Special management reports document myriad 
challenges the target faces. For example, a report may examine what is wrong with the 
company’s inventory control system or that the base of parts suppliers is inadequate.  
 
AUDITS OF INTERNET ACCESS AND BILLINGS FOR DATABASE ACCESS 
Audit reports on Internet access, usually from a proxy server log, can tell a spy what topics 
and sites a company researches and which employees are doing it. Billings for database 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.825 
access of services like D&B, Dialog, or LexisN exis reveal companies the target is checking 
out and doing business with, plus topics they’re investigating. 
 
In addition, these audit reports often reveal if employees are stealing computer resources for 
their own personal ends. Undetected activity over a period of time indicates a lack of security 
oversight. These employees may be candidates for recruitment as inside spies. 
 
Guarding Manual Systems 
Manual systems are all human-readable files and documents. These include commonly 
overlooked items like rolodexes and calendars. Attacks on these systems range from pilfering 
trash to infiltrating a company in the guise of a cleaning crew or vendors to outright theft or 
burglary. Reasonable measures to protect documents include the following: 
1. Place sensitive documents in high - grade locked filing cabinets. It might also be 
advisable to lock sensitive documents in a safe when not in use and at the end of the day. 
Locks or safes should be able to withstand a physical attack of at least one to two hours. 
2. Use a shredder for sensitive documentary waste. In the alternative, organizations 
may opt to have sensitive trash disposed of by a bonded waste-disposal company. If so, 
the trash should be securely stored until it is collected by that company.  
3. Receive and send mail at a secure site. Options include mail drops, post office boxes, 
or locked mailboxes. The key is that the site remains secure. 
4. Provide reasonable perimeter security for offices. Use an alarm system, add secure 
locks to doors and windows, or employ both. 
5. Pay attention to securing auxiliary materials such as: 
? Calendars (they may note key events in a sensitive matter). 
? Specialized internal telephone directories. 
? Notebooks and expense logs from sensitive cases. 
? Works in progress such as reports, notes, and graphics on sensitive cases. 
? Mailing lists. All such lists that have proprietary value should have trapped names 
placed on them as a safeguard. A trapped name is a fictitious one with an address 
that the organization controls. If mail is ever delivered to the trapped name, it will be 
apparent that the list has been compromised. Furthermore, the nature of the mailing 
will probably indicate who bought the list, and may help the victim determine where 
the security breach occurred.  
? Index cards and Rolodexes (if they contain sensitive information.) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.826                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Blackboards, as well as diagrams and charts on easel pads (If they cannot be easily 
locked up, take a Polaroid photo of them and then erase the original. Secure these 
photographs.) 
? Computer-paper carbons and writing tablets that have impressions from notes on 
sensitive topics. (Shred them every day.) 
? Computer printouts of sensitive data (Keep them locked up and use a shredder to 
dispose of them.) 
 
Organizations concerned about the possibility of corporate espionage should establish 
procedures for classifying and marking sensitive items and should have provisions for their 
short-term and long-term storage, as well as their disposal or destruction. Large offices 
should have a structured log-out procedure for sensitive files so it is always possible to 
determine who had what document, as well as where and when they had it.  
 
Guarding Information Stored in Electronic Format 
Electronic data presents security problems that do not exist with manual documents. A 
small, high-density 1.2 MB computer disk can hold the equivalent of more than two regular 
size novels; CDs, USB flash drives, and other electronic storage devices can hold even more. 
With a single CD, a spy can walk out of a building with thousands of sensitive files tucked 
into his shirt pocket. Furthermore, it is fairly quick and simple to copy even large files from a 
hard drive to a CD or thumb drive. Employees seeking to remove sensitive data can even e-
 mail it to an external address so that they never have to physically carry secret information 
out of the premises.  
 
Since, CDs, flash drives, and other electronic storage devices have extreme portability, 
organizations must take rigid measures to protect them and prevent unauthorized copying of 
sensitive files onto them. The following guidelines will help organizations maintain control 
over data stored on electronic media: 
• Write sensitive data files to portable disks.  Back them up with another disk. Lock up 
originals on-site and securely store backups off-site. Furthermore, secured storage areas 
should blend into their surroundings as much as possible in order to make the 
information thief’s job that much more difficult.  
• Label sensitive magnetic media.  This should include both an external label and an 
internal electronic label designating the file’s classification. (The Label command in the 
Properties Section of Windows can do this.) 
• Guard against accidental erasure. Files should be set so that accidental erasures 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.827 
cannot occur. This will also prohibit a technique used by some corporate spies whereby a 
sensitive disk is deleted, then the disk, which appears to be blank, is taken off-site. Once 
off-site, the targeted files are undeleted.  
• Employ password security on sensitive files.  Many word processors can place 
password protection on files. Combined with other security measures, this provides a 
fairly good perimeter of security for files. Software that encrypts entire files can also be 
purchased.  
• Have a consistent backup procedure for all files. Backup sensitive files onto disks 
designated and labeled for that purpose. 
• Do not leave disks containing sensitive files unattended or unsecured. In large 
offices, require authorized users of classified disks to sign them in and out from a 
designated librarian. 
• Scan outgoing disks to ensure they have no deleted but recoverable sensitive files. 
If a disk does contain such files, reformat the disk, and then write the non-sensitive files 
onto the disk. 
• Before disposing of disks, cut them up. For damaged disks containing highly 
sensitive files, it may be advisable to use a degausser on the disks first. A degausser 
removes all data from the disk so its contents cannot be retrieved, even by “undelete” 
programs.  
 
Organizations should also make sure that sensitive files are not kept on hard drives. In 
addition, employees should be trained to not leave computers unattended if they have 
sensitive information on them. Before employees go to lunch or on break, they should be 
required to place their computers in a secure state.  
 
To prevent spies from finding valuable information in the organization’s trash, sensitive 
computer printouts should be shredded and mixed with non-sensitive shredded documents 
before disposal. 
 
Access to sensitive information must be limited to a need-to-know basis. Organizations 
should maintain a system such as a supervised access log that enables security to track the 
information that each person has handled. If sensitive information is to be transmitted over 
a modem, the files should be encrypted, not just password-protected. Although employees 
might appreciate the convenience, they should not be allowed to dial into company 
computers that contain sensitive information from their homes. Any system containing 
sensitive information should be isolated.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.828                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Basic Principles of Spying 
 
Recruited Spies 
In order to obtain inside information on a targeted company, a spy will frequently try to 
recruit an existing employee of that company to act as his agent on the inside. An employee 
recruited to spy against his employer is known as a mole. The mole agrees to betray the trust 
of his employer by handing over confidential information that belongs to his organization. 
The three most common recruiting methods are false flag recruitment, recruiting by 
justification, and trapping.  
 
False Flag Recruitment 
False flag recruitment is among the most common recruiting ploys. If a spy discovers that a 
subject has strong social or political feelings, he attempts to twist those feelings into an 
appeal to help the “cause.” The spy convinces the recruit that providing information will 
help save the environmental conditions in the Amazon, will further the interests of the 
recruit’s native country, or will provide some ot her worthwhile benefit. Of course, the actual 
intelligence product is used for corporate espionage, not to help the cause, but the recruit 
does not learn that until it’s too late. 
 
Another method that can be used to gain information from a recruit is romantic or sexual 
seduction. This is not as common as the use of social or political causes as a justification for 
misappropriating company secrets, but it does happen. The spy or an operative does not 
necessarily trade sexual favors for company secrets. Often all that is needed is for an 
operative of the opposite sex to show some interest in the subject. 
 
Recruiting by Justification 
If a spy understands basic psychology, he may be able to convince a recruit that spying is not 
amoral or immoral in his circumstance.  When recruiting by justification, the spy looks for a 
person who thinks of himself as a victim. An employee who is bitter at having been passed 
over for a promotion, for example, provides an excellent prospect for a recruit. Other typical 
targets include employees who feel they have been underpaid or unrecognized by their 
employer, and who harbor a great deal of resentment because of it. Under the right 
conditions, these employees may agree with a spy that the time is ripe for them to look after 
themselves.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.829 
Trapping Recruits 
In order to trap an employee of the target so that he is essentially forced to spy on his 
company, the recruiting spy will look for some sort of weakness in the potential recruit. 
Common examples include excessive gambling, drug or alcohol abuse, socially unacceptable 
sexual proclivities, past criminal convictions, and wild spending habits.  
 
Once a weakness has been identified in one of the target’s employees, the recruiting spy will 
do one of two things. If the recruit has some sort of chemical dependency or serious 
financial problem, the recruiting spy will typically finance the recruit’s weakness to the extent 
that the recruit becomes dependent on the spy’s favor. If the recruit has something 
embarrassing in his past such as a criminal record, the spy will more likely blackmail the 
recruit to force her to cooperate. In most situations, the recruiter starts as a friend, helping 
the target meet his needs, but later turns to blackmail to keep the recruit in line.  
 
Regardless of the method by which an employee is recruited, once that recruit has stolen or 
divulged a secret piece of information, the spy can easily keep that person in line and force 
them to continue spying. If the recruit tries to back out, the spy simply threatens to turn the 
recruit in to his employer or the police. The threat of losing his job, or possible criminal 
prosecution is usually sufficient to keep an otherwise hesitant recruit on a tight leash.  
 
Counter-Recruitment Training 
Compromising a person’s credibility and integrity requires a series of moves that are 
generally played out over a fairly extended period of time. The methods spies use to turn an 
employee can be very complex and can occur in a multitude of situations; no security officer 
can see far enough ahead to forestall every potential compromise. It is therefore imperative 
to train employees to report any suspected recruitment effort made against them as early as 
possible. The importance of this statement cannot be overestimated. Key employees should 
be made aware of the most common recruitment techniques, which were described above. 
In particular, they should be trained to be wary of people who:   
• Encourage and finance some vice of the employee. 
• Express a great deal of sympathy for a cause that is important to the employee. 
• Offer to help with a serious financial problem. 
• Attempt to seduce the employee. 
• Attempt to blackmail the employee.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.830                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, some of these techniques involve ve ry personal matters that the typical employee 
will not feel comfortable discussing with their company. That is precisely why spies use these 
avenues to attack recruits. No amount of training will convince every employee to bring their 
dark secrets out into the light, but by making employees aware of the ways in which spies 
operate, an organization may be able to help its employees resist their initial overtures. This 
sort of training prepares employees to recognize a recruitment campaign before it has 
advanced to the stage at which the employee can no longer back out.  
 
After Recruitment 
Once on board, the mole receives training on gathering intelligence safely and productively. 
This is not merely an afterthought; the success of the mission depends upon it. Recruits are 
taught what information they should target, how to collect data safely, how to follow security 
procedures, how to plant “bugs,” and other techniques that will help them effectively extract 
information from the target.  
 
Targeted Information 
Recruits are typically instructed to provide a specific piece or category of information, rather 
than being allowed to indiscriminately retrieve whatever secret information they happen to 
come in contact with. The reason is that most recruits lack the technical expertise to identify 
truly important intelligence data. Furthermore, most recruits are not sophisticated 
intelligence-gatherers, so the more information they attempt to retrieve, the more likely it is 
that they will be detected. Therefore, the control (the spy who recruited the mole and directs 
her activities) typically assigns the recruit a narrowly defined information goal. If the mole 
successfully completes this task, her objective might be expanded to include other items.  
 
Methods for Safely Collecting Data   
In order to reduce the likelihood of an intelligence campaign being compromised, a spy will 
generally provide the recruit with some training or instruction on how to safely collect 
information. For instance, when a spy targets sensitive documents, she generally does not 
steal those documents outright. It is more effective to copy the documents, if possible. The 
spy still gets the information she needs, and the victim does not know that its secrets have 
been compromised. If classified documents were to go missing, this could alert the victim to 
the presence of a spy and cause it to tighten its security controls.  
 
Most spies do not try to remove computer media with sensitive security labels from the site. 
Instead, they copy files from labeled media onto plain unmarked disks or small portable 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.831 
drives that will not attract attention from security personnel. Rather than carry sensitive 
information off the premises, they might opt to e-mail the files out to a neutral, relatively 
anonymous e-mail address. 
 
One of a spy’s main goals is to keep a low profile. There are a number of red flags that 
corporate security might look for if espionage is suspected, and an effective spy will try to 
avoid exhibiting any of these characteristics. For example, a person who consistently shows 
up at work early or stays late may make people suspicious, particularly if that individual has 
not, in the past, worked long hours. While it may seem like the best times to steal sensitive 
information are before or after hours, this activity might actually tip off the victim.  
 
In general, recruits are told not to stand out, and to avoid being labeled as a problem 
employee. If an investigation commences as a result of any security leaks, the recruit wants 
to be far down the list of potential suspects. Recruits are also instructed to keep their mouths 
shut. Obviously, they should not discuss their covert activities with anyone else. Finally, 
recruits are told to spend their extra income from spying gradually and in a low-key manner. 
The goal is to avoid attracting attention. 
 
Communications Between the Employee and the Control  
One of the major rules for an employee-spy is that she should not make direct contact with 
her control. Instead, the spy and control will typically communicate via a system of signals: a 
chalk mark in a public place, an innocuous e-mail to a secure address, an innocent note left 
on a bulletin board, graffiti on a wall, or a mundane newspaper ad. When e-mail is used to 
transfer documents, it is usually sent to untraceable addresses or employs intermediaries 
known as “cutouts.” 
 
When spies must make direct deliveries to their controls, they leave documents, computer 
media, or film and tapes at secure spy drops. These drop sites can be in parks, abandoned 
buildings, behind vending machines, or in other similar locations. The only requirements are 
accessibility, cover, security, and the imagination of the spy and his contact. Prearranged 
signals such as those described above are used to let the control know that an item has been 
left at the site. The control may leave the spy’s compensation at the same site. 
 
Security Measures for the Recruit 
Spies are instructed to not leave incriminating evidence at their home or at their company 
workspace. The goal is to eliminate any evidence trail that could lead back to them. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.832                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, they do not want to give the target any indication that it is actually being 
infiltrated.  
 
Computer security measures for a spy can be of particular importance. Recruits are generally 
instructed not to save any documents — even for a short time — on a hard drive or external 
storage device without encryption. For added security, many corporate spies double-encrypt 
everything they steal with two different systems. The overriding goal is to leave no 
incriminating evidence of the intelligence campaign and to avoid detection at all costs. The 
longer the spy can continue his activities undetected, the more damage he can do.  
 
Planting Bugs 
Recruits are taught where listening devices should be planted in order to gather needed 
information and, at the same time, avoid detection. Bugs are usually placed in meeting 
rooms, offices of key employees, or other areas conducive to the discussion of secret 
information. Equally important is the decision of where to deploy taping equipment. The spy 
needs to place the equipment in a remote location where tapes can be safely retrieved. If 
taping is done on-site, the spy risks losing the tapes if the listening device is discovered. 
Finally, the spy must know when and how to service hidden listening devices, and how to 
safely remove them when the surveillance is finished.  
 
Deception Techniques
In many cases, spies are able to gather information from employees of a target without 
recruiting those employees in the surveillance campaign. Instead, the spy tricks the employee 
into revealing confidential information. Typical scams include using fake employment 
interviews, posing as a corporate headhunter, conducting bogus market research, soliciting 
contract bids on fictitious projects, and social engineering. Each of these scams is designed 
to get the employee to reveal sensitive information about his company’s business. 
 
Employment Advertisements 
Employment want-ads are a great way for intelligence thieves to get existing employees from 
a target company to turn over sensitive information. The bogus ads offer great job 
opportunities to people with qualifications that match those of a target’s key personnel.    
 
The employees who answer the ads think they are applying for a real job; they expect a 
technical interview on what they do. During the bogus interview, the spy will seek to obtain 
as much information as possible about what the employees do, the projects they work on, 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.833 
the equipment they utilize, etc. This is a very low-cost collection method. If the spy meets 
with the employee in a restaurant, for example, he is only out the cost of a meal and the cost 
of placing the advertisement. In a highly competitive job market, fake interviews serve as a 
powerful tool in corporate espionage.  
 
Headhunter Scams 
In a variation on the fake employment ad scheme, a spy calls a key employee of the target 
while posing as a headhunter with a client who is interested in that employee. The 
“headhunter” asks for a résumé and information about projects on which the employee is 
currently working. An in-depth interview by the “client” can provide additional details. This 
method allows the spy to target key employees more directly than simply running fake 
employment ads.  
 
Market Research Scams 
In a market research scam, the spy contacts companies by telephone posing as a 
representative of a well-known market research company. The spy uses a phony 
questionnaire designed to obtain background data to assist in further penetration of the 
company. The spy might, in some cases, attempt to obtain direct intelligence data during the 
telephone interview. The spy frequently offers the employee a bogus reward of some kind in 
return for responding to the questionnaire. These calls tend to aim at lower level workers 
who have operational knowledge of the business, but who are not likely to be as defensive as 
higher level managers.  
 
Phony Contract Bids 
Another indirect method for obtaining intelligence from human sources is the call for phony 
bids. For instance, a spy might send out an impressive-looking Request for Proposals (RFP) 
package on a construction or manufacturing project. The RFP states that certain operational 
and financial data must be submitted as part of the bid. This ruse works very well when 
assessing the ability of a company to manufacture a certain product. The bigger the bait, the 
more information the target company is likely to reveal. The return address on the RFP is a 
mail drop, which insulates the spy from detection. The deadline set forth in the phony bid 
requirements helps ensure that the spy gets the information he needs by the date he needs it. 
 
One advantage of the scams discussed above is that the victims remain unaware that they 
have turned over sensitive information to a spy, even after the leak has sprung. If there is no 
follow-up over a job interview, for example, the applicant simply thinks he did not get the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.834                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
job. If there is no feedback on a bid proposal, the victim thinks it failed to get the bid. In 
general, no feedback is expected on marketing research other than receipt of the promised 
gift. 
 
 
Infiltration Techniques 
A corporate spy may choose to collect intelligence information himself rather than recruit an 
employee of the target. Factors that weigh in this decision include a tight time schedule, the 
lack of available recruits, or expense constraints. The spy might simply have specialized 
knowledge that makes him the best one to do the job. 
 
Posing as an Employee or Contract Laborer 
Penetrating a company can be very simple. As indicated earlier, one common technique is to 
obtain work as a security officer or a member of the janitorial crew for the victim 
organization. Anyone who saw the movie Wall Street might remember Charlie Sheen’s 
character putting on a janitor’s overalls to ga in access to sensitive information at a rival 
company. Even if the hiring company does a background check on all potential employees 
(usually nothing more than a cursory criminal history search) a good corporate spy will rarely 
have a serious criminal record. It is not likely that a spy will be screened out during a routine 
hiring process.  
 
Security professionals often comment that the best spies are people who have advanced 
technical knowledge; for example, Ph.D.s in electrical engineering or biotechnology. If a spy 
needs highly technical information on a competitor, he may have to use a person with an 
advanced technical background who knows how to identify and/or access the sought after 
materials.  
 
Individuals with high-level technical skills and high security privileges generally have to be 
recruited from within a targeted organization. However, in some intelligence campaigns a 
spy will plant a person with advanced technical credentials in a targeted company in a 
professional capacity. That person gains access to the target’s proprietary information and 
funnels it out to the spy. A person who penetrates a company in this manner is known as a 
“sleeper,” an infiltrator who works on a long-term basis with an acceptable cover. Sleepers 
will be discussed in more detail later in this section.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.835 
Stealing Badges 
Stealing or counterfeiting employee badges is one fairly common infiltration method utilized 
by corporate spies. If badges are in use at the target’s site, the spy can generally fake a copy 
using a desktop publishing program. Contractor badge patterns can be viewed on workers 
eating lunch at local restaurants. Even if the badges have magnetic strips, the spy may still be 
able to enter the plant at a highly traveled entry point where a guard only makes a quick 
visual inspection of security badges as people enter the site, allowing anyone displaying a 
badge to enter. Even if the only method of entry is by an electronic badge scan, a spy can 
still piggyback in on another person’s badge. If the spy displays a badge, an employee of the 
target can be talked into letting him into the facility.  
 
Stealing badges is also an option. At bars and nightclubs, women might leave their purses 
and handbags lying about with security badges protruding in open view. Men do the same 
thing with jackets hung over bar stools. A badge purloined on Friday night will probably not 
be missed until Monday. Once a spy has the badge, he just pastes his picture on the front 
and he’s ready to go. More sophisticated techniques include having someone lift a badge 
from an employee’s purse or jacket. The card is  passed on to a colleague who runs it through 
a magnetic card reader. This can be done quickly, in the car in a parking lot, for example. 
The badge is then returned to the employee before anyone notices it is missing. Later, the 
magnetic image that was scanned from the stolen card is transferred onto blank ID card 
stock containing a magnetic strip. With the addition of an appropriate picture and printing, 
the spy now has a badge that will get him into the facility, and no one knows that security 
has been compromised.  
 
Moles and Sleepers  
If a client has a very long-range interest in monitoring a company, he may place a spy in that 
company as a permanent employee. This employee, known as a sleeper, keeps a low profile 
and reports to his control on a regular basis about the operations of the company. This kind 
of spy, especially if well schooled in tradecraft, will be extremely difficult to detect. With all 
the electronic spydrops available through e-mail, the sleeper never even has to risk exposure 
by meeting directly with his control.  
 
One way to help prevent the introduction of sleepers is to perform thorough background 
checks (where permitted by law) on all applicants. This may help detect operatives who have 
padded their résumés to make sure they get hired.  Of course, a clever spy will make sure that 
there is a convincing reference for every piece of information on an operative’s résumé. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.836                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A mole functions in the same manner as a sleeper. The difference between the two is that a 
sleeper is a person who is deliberately planted as an employee in a company to extract 
information. A mole, by contrast, is usually an existing employee of the targeted organization 
who is somehow compromised, agreeing to turn over her company’s secrets to the business 
intelligence professional. When recruiting moles, intelligence specialists look for employees 
who are stable enough in their professional and personal life to function as spies on a long-
 term basis. As discussed earlier, there are a number of ways to recruit a mole, but the prime 
motivation is usually greed.  
 
Places Where Spies Snoop 
When spies do infiltrate a company’s premises, they rarely have to break into  file cabinets or 
desk drawers to get the information they need. Due to laziness, ignorance, or just poor 
organizational skills, employees often fail to lock up sensitive documents each night. Messy 
desks are the rule, not the exception. Messy desks are easier for a spy to rifle through than 
neatly organized workstations. If documents are removed from a sloppy desktop, they may 
not be missed for quite some time.  
 
Messiness is not confined to documents. Computers often have mounds of disks, CDs, and 
other media lying unprotected around them. Notes on the sides of terminals and screens or 
in unlocked desk drawers frequently broadcast passwords and user IDs to anyone who cares 
to look. User manuals lying about often have similar information scribbled inside. All this 
clutter is created by employees who place convenience before security. Companies that do 
not enforce clean desk policies and do not require sensitive materials to be locked up are 
asking for trouble. Employees should be trained to report signs that their offices have been 
searched (for example, papers have been moved, disks seem to have been shuffled, files are 
out of order), even when no information is actually missing. 
 
Mailroom 
The mailroom is one of the corporate spy’s favorite places to snoop. A great deal of 
information can be obtained from the mailroom by making a simple phone call. The spy can 
learn where to ship and receive packages, how the target’s internal billing system works, 
where to locate employees of the target company, and even the company’s Federal Express 
account number. A spy can also walk into most mailrooms and, simply by acting like he is 
supposed to be there, walk away with cost center account numbers, telephone directories, 
copies of internal communications, and in some cases even correspondence and packages. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.837 
Loading Docks 
Despite the fact that many companies maintain video cameras and security guard patrols at 
their loading docks, these can still be great places to gather intelligence and to slip sensitive 
information out the door. The security personnel at the loading docks are frequently 
contract workers with minimal training on how to spot a sophisticated infiltrator. 
Furthermore, contract security personnel may not be familiar with managers and employees 
from other departments. A spy can sometimes don a badge and a clipboard and move about 
the loading docks with impunity, unquestioned by the security officers who assume he is 
supposed to be there. Meanwhile, the spy is copying down purchase order numbers, address 
label data, and types of merchandise being shipped and received.  
 
Security guards may be trained to prevent the removal of manuals, documents, or software 
that are labeled or color-coded as “confidential.” However, spies can easily change labels and 
covers to a different color. Security officers generally do not have the training to look for 
other indicators of sensitive materials that are being removed. 
 
Storage Areas 
Spies frequently target storage areas for information because they are generally low traffic 
areas, thus the risk of being detected is minimal. If someone does come into the area while 
the spy is there, he will have a cover story handy; for example, he may say he is doing 
research or performing an audit. A prop like a clipboard will usually make the  
story convincing. 
 
For manual documents, the spy will check: 
• Unlocked file cabinets. 
• Unlocked closets and storage rooms. 
• Areas containing archived microfiche records and computer printouts. 
• Off-site, rented storage lockers. 
 
For computer media, he will be on the lookout for: 
• Unlocked storage areas for computer media (such as disks, tapes, and external drives). 
• Unsecured media libraries. 
 
For the open storage of critical equipment, parts, or raw materials, the spy will note amount, 
type, and transit information found on the merchandise. If the materials are kept in a secure 
area, the spy will try to obtain the access code by observing an employee as he enters the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.838                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
area. It is also possible to spray entry keypads with an ultraviolet solution that remains 
invisible to the naked eye. The user unknowingly wipes the solution off the keys that he 
presses when entering the code. The spy can determine the keys the user punched by 
viewing the keypad with a portable ultraviolet lamp.  
 
Hotels
Hotel rooms are remarkably easy to bug and to search. Whenever a key corporate player 
travels, there is a chance that spies will be listening at her heels. By using transactional 
intelligence, spies determine which hotels an executive frequents. Once that piece of 
information is determined, the spy can set up surveillance of the target’s room. For example, 
spies frequently bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel rooms and plant 
eavesdropping devices. 
 
Knowing where an executive is staying also makes it easier to set up fixed surveillance of the 
comings and goings of visitors to the hotel rooms or meeting rooms. For example, the spy 
can spot the target’s vehicle and rig it with satellite tracking to follow his movements during 
a business trip.  
 
Electronic and visual surveillance are not the only spy activities conducive to the hotel 
environment. If a spy can gain access to an executive’s room, whether by bribery or simply 
by finding the door left open by a maid, he can copy sensitive files from a laptop left in the 
room. There may also be sensitive documents in the room that the spy can photograph. 
Trash in the room’s waste paper baskets is also a potential source of information.  
 
If sensitive documents are being delivered by a service such as UPS or Federal Express, they 
can be intercepted after they are delivered to the hotel but before the target has received 
them. The spy opens the envelope and copies or photographs the contents. The documents 
are then resealed in a new delivery envelope. The invoice is removed from the plastic holder 
on the original envelope and placed in the new envelope. The spy affixes a shipping label, 
which is easy to generate on a desktop program, and no one suspects that the message has 
been intercepted.  
 
Spies can view materials delivered in a conventional paper envelope without even opening it. 
There are special solvents called Mail Inspectors that can be sprayed on the outside of an 
envelope that allow the spy to see through the envelope and view the contents inside. After a 
few minutes, the solution dries and the envelope becomes opaque again. With considerably 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.839 
less sophistication, the spy can simply resort to steaming open envelopes and then resealing 
them after she has read their contents. It is generally not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel 
employees in order to gain to access the target’s correspondence. The same is true of 
employees of message and delivery services.  
 
Warning Signs of Infiltrations 
If a spy does his job properly, it will be very difficult to detect an infiltration. Generally, 
organizations have a better chance of preventing infiltrations by establishing appropriate 
security measures such as accompanying all vendors while on-site, and requiring security 
badges for access to sensitive areas. Detection can be difficult, but there are some signs that 
organizations can look for that might indicate there is a spy in their midst:  
• Employees who are most likely to be recruited as spies are those who exhibit some sort 
of bitterness or resentment toward their employer. Be alert for abnormal activities by 
employees who seem to feel that they are under-appreciated, under-utilized, or are 
treated unfairly.  
• Employees who express some sort of political or moral opposition to an organization’s 
operations may be susceptible to a false flag recruitment. 
• Employees who are undergoing a personal financial problem (frequently associated with 
drug addiction, gambling addiction, high medical expenses, or some other personal 
crisis) may also be vulnerable to recruitment. 
• Employees who suddenly undergo a major lifestyle change, buying luxury items, taking 
exotic vacations, etc., with no apparent increase in income should be watched. This is a 
common red flag of fraud schemes, but may also indicate an employee who is being paid 
for divulging trade secrets. 
• Employees who frequently work late or come to work early may be trying to get access 
to confidential materials. This behavior is particularly suspicious when the employee in 
question works unusual hours as compared to others in his department.  
• In some cases, moles will actually discuss their covert activity with their coworkers. 
Employees should be trained to report this, as well as other suspicious behavior.  
• Employees who seem to spend a lot of time in areas not necessary to their work 
functions, particularly areas where sensitive materials are stored, may be attempting to 
misappropriate company secrets. This should be investigated, particularly if the employee 
is found in these areas after hours.  
• Similarly, employees who attempt to access sensitive computer files that are either above 
their authorization level or outside the scope of their work duties might warrant 
investigation. Organizations should maintain an automated journal that records events 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.840                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
such as attempted access of restricted files.  
• If employees have sensitive files saved on their hard drives or disks, this may be a sign 
that they are misdirecting that information. This is especially true when the employee in 
question is not working on, or should not have access to, the file in question. If records 
reveal that this employee has e-mailed the proprietary information to an off-site location, 
this is another indicator of information theft. 
• Vendors should be escorted at all times when  on the organization’s premises. Any time a 
vendor is seen loitering unescorted around file rooms, offices, mail rooms, shipping 
docks, computer media storage areas, or other sensitive zones, the incident should be 
reported as a security violation and potential intrusion attempt. The same is true for 
janitorial personnel, security guards, trash collectors, and other non-employees. 
• Spies may come disguised as repairpersons, janitors, deliverymen, etc. Incidents in  
which service technicians show up without having been called may indicate an  
attempted infiltration.  
• Employee reports of lost security badges, access cards, passwords, etc. could be a sign 
that a spy has stolen these items in order to infiltrate a site. 
• Obviously, if files or computer disks that contain sensitive information are missing, this 
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropriation of information. In general, spies will copy—
 rather than steal—proprietary information, but sometimes sensitive documents are 
actually pilfered. 
• Employee desks or offices that have been tampered with are a common sign of 
intrusion. Reports of stolen materials clearly point to an infiltration, but more frequently 
intruders will only rifle through files, desks, or computer disks, choosing to copy 
sensitive information rather than steal it. Employees should be trained to report 
incidents where their offices or desks appear to have been “messed up,” even when no 
materials have been stolen.  
• Security personnel should log reports of persons who try to enter a facility without 
proper identification or authorization. Similarly, attempts to piggyback into a facility by 
following a person with authorization could be a sign of an attempted intrusion.  
• Reports of trespassing or other criminal activity near a secure facility may also indicate a 
surveillance campaign. In particular, instances where strangers are seen loitering around 
the outside of the facility or digging through trash bins could be signs of corporate 
spying. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.841 
Countermeasures  
While security officers cannot turn their organizations into impenetrable fortresses, they can 
implement specific countermeasures to thwart a spy’s attempts at infiltrating their company: 
• Materials bearing proprietary data should not be stored in areas visible to the public. If 
no other option exists, the organization should only use unlettered, color-coded 
containers as opposed to labeling a particular file drawer “Confidential.” This will make 
it more difficult for spies to tell where sensitive information can be found.  
• Organizations should ask about their bank’s  confidentiality policy and make sure the 
bank doesn’t permit tellers to access information on major accounts without a manager’s 
permission. If the company has sensitive financial accounts, it should find a bank with 
computer systems that use mandatory access controls. Such controls prevent bank 
employees without proper level of privilege from accessing large accounts. Information 
on large commercial accounts should be maintained on a need-to-know basis. 
• Security should establish a procedure for tracking and locking up sensitive data.  
• Cleaning personnel should be properly bonded and identified, and their access to the 
facility should be controlled. 
• Vendors should have verified credentials and must be escorted by a company 
representative during their visit.  
• Any proprietary lists must be password protected and trapped. 
• Other general countermeasures include educating employees to properly store sensitive 
data and to question the credentials of anyone visiting the site. Employees should also be 
instructed as to what information they may disclose over the telephone. 
• Employees should sign nondisclosure agreements. In addition, the legal department 
should be consulted about integrating vendor and supplier nondisclosure agreements 
into standard contracts. 
 
 
Transactional Intelligence 
Just about any mundane business transaction can offer a potential information payoff to a 
spy. Frequent flyer miles document where an executive has traveled. Credit card receipts 
record a trip’s itinerary and goods or services purchased. Even videos purchased or rented at 
a video store are useful for documenting a targeted employee’s tastes and proclivities. Any 
one piece of information by itself has minimal value. Properly compiled, however, this 
information can provide an extensive profile on a target. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.842                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Informants 
The serious corporate spy will develop a network of paid informants who can get this 
monitoring intelligence for him. These informants come from a wide range of businesses: 
• Travel agents. 
• Airline reservation personnel. 
• Major credit card companies. 
• Staff at major Internet providers.  
• Employees at video, music, and other entertainment outlets.  
• Staff of adult entertainment providers that the target frequents. 
• Telephone company employees with access to telephone records. 
• Employees of commercial database providers such as Dialog and D&B who have access 
to transaction records. 
 
While the purpose of these informants is not to act as regular spies, they will, for a fee, 
provide transactional intelligence on a subject. That transactional information can have a 
critical impact. It can tell a corporate spy about: 
• A person’s vices. 
• Details of business travel. 
• Hotels where the target stayed and where she is likely to stay again in the future (this can 
be useful for setting up surveillance).  
• Whom the target has called. 
• Interests and hobbies (another way to edge into the target’s confidence). 
• Companies or subjects the target has researched. 
 
This type of intelligence is really a hybrid of documentary source intelligence (combining 
purely open sources and gray sources) and HUMINT. An inside contact is needed to obtain 
the information, but once the contact sells it to a corporate spy, the spy can analyze it 
without need of additional assistance. 
 
Monitoring intelligence is very helpful in the collection of human intelligence. If a spy knows 
a subject’s hobbies, she can see to it that she “m eets” the target at a restaurant, convention, 
etc., striking up a conversation or possibly a friendship. A targeted employee in this scenario 
becomes an unwitting source of information.  
 
The spy does not necessarily have to direct these efforts at an employee of the targeted 
organization. For instance, if the organization uses a contractor to microfilm its records, the 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.843 
spy might attempt to compromise an employee of the contractor or penetrate its security 
rather than attacking the target organization directly.  
 
A spy can also become his own inside source of transactional intelligence. For example, if a 
spy wants to develop a telephone history on a subject, he can send the subject a free phone 
card for 60 minutes of calling time. There are companies that will mail the phone cards to 
the subject and then track all their calls for a small fee (less than $50.00). This kind of service 
can be a powerful intelligence-gathering device. Employees should be trained to be wary of 
this kind of scam.  
 
Decoy Websites 
The Internet offers additional avenues for collecting information. One tactic used by spies is 
to set up a website to collect résumés for particular technical specialties. Included on the 
website is a questionnaire that visitors are instructed to fill out “to aid in placing you.” The 
site can also require visitors to register for “free” research services. The information that the 
applicants provide makes it possible to keep a log of the links that they access.  
 
It is not difficult to create a site that targets will visit; it is  simply a matter of doing some 
research on hot topics in a particular field. The spy creates a site that has the necessary 
metatags for search engines to pick up the title. She fills the site with relevant links and 
builds logging software into the site to track the links that users access. This can create a 
profile of the user and help the spy determine what he is interested in. The spy can even call 
users as a follow-up. The user is impressed because someone from the site took an interest 
in him, and this gives the spy a natural lead-in to pump the subject for information. 
 
A decoy website might also enable the spy to gain access to the target’s computer system. 
For instance, people frequently use the same user ID and password for a number of 
different applications because it is easier to remember than having several different 
passwords. The spy’s website might require visitors to enter a user ID and password for the 
“research services” or to view bogus job postings. This information is stored by the website 
and later used to try to gain access to the target’s computer system. Decoy websites can also 
be set up so that visitors unwittingly download viruses or other malicious software. This may 
not necessarily help a spy gain information, but it can help sabotage a company’s computer 
system.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.844                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telling Good Lies 
Rather than infiltrate a company to extract needed information, a spy might mislead 
employees of the target so that they are induced to divulge sensitive information. Given the 
nature of the data required, it may be simpler and safer to develop a cover story and simply 
coax the target’s employees into revealing information, rather than using an operative to steal 
the necessary data. This approach can be a powerful one, especially when the spy has a 
specialized knowledge or background. For example, if the spy has training as an electronic 
engineer, approaching people in the circuit design department of a high-tech company would 
have a natural flow or quality. The key to this type of attack is for the spy to be able to 
mislead the target about his intentions; in other words, the spy has to be able to tell  
good lies.  
 
Regardless of the spy’s background, the lie that he tells must contain a large measure of 
truth. Lies not built on a foundation of truth falter quickly under skeptical questioning. He 
must be familiar with the background of his story. Hence, he has to do his homework in 
advance. If he does not have a firm knowledge of electronic engineering, he has to learn 
enough about it to carry on a conversation well enough to convince others he knows what 
he is talking about. This does not mean the spy has to be able to solve complex electrical 
engineering equations. He just needs to know enough about the subject to keep a 
conversation going and to steer clear of areas of which he is obviously ignorant. 
 
Suppose the spy is after specifics on the design of a microprocessor. He poses as a sales 
engineer in a field office. In this position, he would not be expected to know all the details of 
microprocessor design. Nevertheless, he has a good pretext for contacting someone who is 
familiar with the design. He could claim, for example, that he is under a time constraint from 
a customer and he needs some details to help close a sale. To give the call a greater air of 
authenticity, he can have the “salesman” he’s supporting on the line too. He can also tie in 
the call to current events, dropping the name of a customer who has been written up in the 
trade press. In other words he creates an internally consistent lie that the employee in the 
design department can accept and believe. 
 
If the spy has to meet with the employee in person, rather than over the phone, he would 
bring the necessary props. These include: 
• Fake ID 
• Bogus business cards 
• Product displays 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.845 
• Associates she can call on the telephone during the meeting to back up his story 
 
The important factor is to make the target comfortable. In advance of the conversation, he 
prepares by studying technical details about the product and personal details about other 
people in the company or the industry. These facts are peppered into the conversation with 
the target, the goal being to get the target to let his guard down and divulge the sought after 
information. 
 
 
Visual Surveillance Against People 
 
Pre-Recruitment Surveillance 
In developing human sources, spies know that they should never underestimate the 
importance of doing pre-recruitment surveillance on targets. There are a number of goals for 
this kind of surveillance. They include: 
• To discover: 
? Who they are 
? Where they live 
? What they do in their spare time 
? What they want to keep secret  
? Who their friends are 
? Who their enemies are 
• To look for: 
? Cars 
? Homes 
? Recreational activities 
? Levels of income and debts 
? The subject’s importance to the organization 
• To uncover what they throw in the trash. For example: 
? Financial papers 
? Medical problems 
? Family problems 
• To learn about their enemies, such as:  
? Ex-lovers 
? Fired employees 
? Political opponents 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.846                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Competitors 
? People owed money 
• To make contact with the target:  
? By finding out what he thinks about his job, family, or life in general 
? By determining the degree to which the target will confide in others 
 
Briefing Files on the Subject 
Beyond the fundamentals of doing pre-recruitment surveillance, the corporate spy also must 
master regular techniques to monitor ongoing operations. These techniques begin with a 
briefing file on the intended subject. If a spy were to follow a key executive for the company, 
the following would be essential starting details: 
• Name of the subject 
• Photos of the subject 
• Detailed description 
• Known associates 
• Frequent hangouts 
• Routine activities and schedule 
• Vehicles used (with tag numbers) 
• Type of neighborhood where subject lives 
• Street or location layout 
 
Moving Surveillance 
The spy has to be flexible and imaginative in conducting a moving surveillance. For example, 
placing a reflective stripe on the back of the subject’s car makes it more distinctive at night. 
Laying a cheap wristwatch under the rear tire  of the subject’s car will establish when he 
leaves; the broken face will stop the watch at the time they depart. If a subject goes into a 
bar or restaurant, the spy knows to order food or drink and pay for it immediately so that he 
can blend in and to be ready to leave at a moment’s notice. 
 
Fixed Surveillance 
Fixed surveillance, while it has many advantages over moving surveillance, has one great 
vulnerability. The base from which the surveillance is conducted (for example, a van parked 
across the street from the subject) might be spotted by the target, as well as neighbors and 
curious passersby. In order to camouflage a fixed surveillance campaign, the spy must be 
familiar with the surroundings and choose a cover that will blend in.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.847 
E-Mail 
E-mail is frequently dense with data on company problems, personnel issues, status on 
projects, travel plans, and merger activity. It is also the most vulnerable form of computer 
information. The vulnerability arises from the fact that almost anyone in the company has 
access to the service. Literally, everybody fr om temps to the CEO has an e-mail address. 
This wide-open access creates an immense exposure that is compounded by the desire for 
convenience. Employees in many companies are able to check their e-mail from home. 
Direct access from off-site via modem can permit compromises of the e-mail server.  
 
Once a penetration of an e-mail server occurs, whether by hacking through search engines or 
by using a legitimate account, a spy is in position to do great harm. He can forge an e-mail 
address for his account and send messages about the company requesting information. 
People will respond thinking he is from auditing, for example, when he may be just a temp 
working in customer service.  
 
An internal spy can arrange to intercept sensitive e-mail by inserting e-mail addresses into 
internal mailing lists. When proprietary or sensitive information is distributed (for example, 
to the “management” mailing list) the spy receives a copy at either an internal or an external 
e-mail site. With an external e-mail address embedded into a sensitive mailing list, it is quite 
possible that an internal spy can monitor electronic mail long after ceasing to work for the 
targeted company.  
 
E-mail security programs can detect unauthorized addresses planted into lists, so long-term 
implants are not always an effective strategy. However, when a spy knows intensive activity 
is afoot, (for example, on a merger or acquisition) short-term “taps” into e-mail lists can be 
very productive.  
 
 
Social Engineering 
In a social engineering scheme, the information thief manipulates people into handing over 
secret information through use of trickery, persuasion, threats, or cajolery. The social 
engineer usually, though not always, operates by phone or e-mail. In some cases, the social 
engineer obtains direct information from her victim about a company’s business operations, 
contracts, customer lists, or so on. In other cases, a hacker uses social engineering to obtain 
passwords or otherwise gain access to a computer system. Social engineering is thought to 
play at least some part in most computer system penetrations.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.848                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are a wide variety of social engineering techniques; the only common denominator 
being that the spy attempts to extract confidential information from an employee of the 
target company through some form of trickery or deceit. Some of the more common 
schemes are described in the following sections.  
 
The Neophyte
In one of the most common social engineering schemes, the spy calls the help desk of a 
target company and claims to be a new employee on his first day at work. The spy complains 
that he has not yet been given a password and so he has been unable to start his computer 
and begin working. The help desk employee gives the spy a password, thereby enabling him 
to enter the company’s system. Typically, the spy does not call the help desk directly in this 
type of scheme. Instead, he calls another department and asks to be transferred to the help 
desk so the call appears to be internal.  
 
The Power Broker 
In another common scheme, the attacker contacts the help desk and claims to be a high-
 ranking company official, an influential client, or some other imposing figure. Background 
searches of securities filings, government filings, company websites, or annual reports are 
used to choose the fake identity the spy will use. The spy uses his false credentials to bully 
the help desk into handing out passwords, remote-access software, or even some key piece 
of business information.  
 
The Systems Administrator  
In this scheme, an information thief contacts a computer user in an organization and claims 
to be an IT employee of the company. He tells the user that a “network problem” has been 
identified with the user’s computer. The spy asks for the password the user logged on with 
so he can fix the problem. Most employees are willing to give their password out to a 
systems administrator when requested, making this technique very effective. In a similar 
scheme, the spy will pass out a memo on customer letterhead asking users to verify their log-
 on information for “security reasons.”   
 
Fraudulent Surveys 
Fake surveys are another common social engineering scheme. Posing as survey takers, either 
in person or over the Internet, spies gather information from people about their names, 
nicknames, ages, birth dates, names and birthdays of spouses or children, pets, favorite 
hobbies, favorite song, favorite movie, and dozens of other personal preferences and 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.849 
attributes. The theory is that most people choose a password that has some level of personal 
importance. The spies take the responses from their “surveys” and try them as passwords 
when they attempt to break into a system.  
 
Fake Prizes 
Finally, fake gift certificates or sweepstakes can be used to get access to a person’s password. 
For instance, an employee of a target company is sent an e-mail gift certificate from a fake 
vendor the spy has set up. The employee might be told the gift certificate is a prize, or that it 
was purchased for them by a “secret admirer.” In any event, the employee only has to access 
the vendor’s website in order to select the me rchandise he wants to buy with his gift 
certificate. Of course, in order to make the purc hase he has to log onto a special area of the 
website, which requires a user ID and password. The spy in this scheme is betting that the 
employee will use the same user ID and password that he uses at work.  
 
Reverse Social Engineering 
Reverse social engineering creates the impression in the target’s mind that the spy is 
someone who can help them. It is actually a form of false flag recruitment. The scam can be 
perpetrated by telephone, e-mail, or regular mail. In a typical scheme, the spy poses as a 
representative of some software company. He sends a message to the target indicating that a 
software product (Product X) that the target owns has a possible defect. The target is 
instructed to call the software company (the spy) with his user ID and password in order to 
receive the fix. When the target calls, the spy obtains his access codes and then pronounces 
that his edition of the product is okay. Now the spy has access to that software product (for 
instance, a sensitive database) to use at will. 
 
Countering Social Engineering 
There are a number of security measures organizations can adopt to counteract social 
engineering schemes. While a few technical solutions may help, the majority of controls for 
this type of attack involve training employees to be aware of how social engineering works, 
the data that spies will seek, and the information that employees are allowed to disseminate.  
 
Help desk employees should be trained to ask specific, identifying questions before giving 
out any information over the phone. The organization should clearly explain the minimum 
identification requirements that callers must meet before information can be distributed. A 
two-factor authentication rule should be mandatory. If a caller fails to identify himself 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.850                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
according to the authentication rule, the person taking the call should report this incident to 
the security group as an unauthorized intrusion attempt.  
 
When information is given out, it should be harmless, boilerplate information. Passwords or 
personal identification numbers should never be distributed over the phone without 
concrete proof of the caller’s identity. References to key administrative, technical, and billing 
contacts for the corporate Internet domain should also be as anonymous as possible. If a 
company does not list its domain administrator by title, then a spy may not know exactly 
whom to impersonate when he calls the help desk. Techniques already discussed such as 
properly disposing of confidential trash will also help prevent dumpster divers from coming 
up with contact information that they can use to trick employees. 
 
Employee awareness is another key to fighting social engineering. Employees may be told 
what information to give out and what authentication factors to require, but it is another 
thing to get them to follow these procedures. One of the most effective ways to promote 
compliance with security policies is to make people aware of threats and actual instances of 
social engineering attacks. Some organizations maintain internal websites or distribute 
employee newsletters with stories about security breaches, along with prevention tips and 
information.  
 
An even more effective awareness method is to selectively test employees’ security readiness. 
For instance, security personnel should call their own organization’s help desk to see what 
information they can obtain without identifying themselves. It is also a good idea to run the 
“systems administrator” scam on employees six months after they have started, to see if they 
remember not to give out their passwords to random MIS calls. If employees give up 
information without following procedures, they should get a stern warning about their 
security responsibilities. This type of reminder will be remembered far longer than a  
training session.  
 
 
Cloaking and Misdirection 
While honesty is essential in business dealings with associates and investors, it cannot always 
be a security team’s primary strategy. In so me circumstances, misdirecting the opponent is 
essential. Rather than remaining passively behind the static defenses of security officers, 
perimeter fences, locks, and access controls, a security manager may need to create an active 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.851 
counterattack program. Such a program ensures that information thieves are as misinformed 
as possible. A misinformed opponent is a defeated one.  
 
Intelligence Needs 
Good intelligence gathering is a prelude to any successful counteroffensive against industrial 
espionage agents. If a manager does not know the opponents and their methods of attack, 
effective cloaking and misdirection will not be possible. 
 
An effective intelligence-gathering network need not employ an army of spies. Basic 
intelligence can be gathered from a variety of sources, which include print media, 
commercial databases, networking with other security managers, existing staff within the 
company, and regular security surveys of the business. This type of ongoing, low-level 
intelligence program helps identify potential and emerging security problems. Increasing the 
activity during periods of heightened threat to the business is not difficult. Because a 
preliminary intelligence system will already be in place, bringing on additional personnel and 
resources will not be overwhelming. 
 
Print Media 
Print sources should not consist of an unread mountain of journals on the manager’s desk. It 
is far more productive to subscribe to just a few professional publications that are read and 
indexed. Security Management, the National Asso ciation of Legal Investigators’ The Legal 
Investigator, and the Journal of Security Administration offer insight on the latest security 
and investigative trends. 
 
Local newspapers can provide an overview of general criminal activity relevant to the 
business, and area business journals are good sources for accounts of industrial espionage. 
The security team should also read employment ads for phony job interview schemes. 
 
Database Searches 
Computer databases are an excellent intelligence resource. Most security managers do not 
have the time to regularly read all the major national newspapers and business or technical 
magazines relevant to their client company. However, a security professional can go to the 
public library for a few hours once a month and scan magazine databases like InfoTrac for 
company references. A more efficient method is to subscribe to a clipping service, which will 
scan hundreds of articles from a variety of sources each month and provide articles 
containing any keywords (such as a company or employee name) that have been specified.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.852                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Managers may want to explore the cost/benef it trade-off of buying a modem and PC for 
their office that provides immediate access to the growing number of online resources, 
including ASISNet from the American Society for Industrial Security (www.asisonline.org) 
and a host of news databases. In scanning such databases, the security manager can run 
searches on any references to the company’s na me, officers, or products, as well as on the 
following key case topics: 
• Industrial espionage 
• Business intelligence  
• Competitor intelligence 
 
The researcher should read all online abstracts and save any articles if further details are 
required. A picture will emerge of what is available in the public domain about the company. 
The security team should then evaluate how this information could work to an information 
thief’s advantage. 
 
More and more local newspapers are becoming electronically available via the Internet or 
through libraries. The astute security manager should use this resource to check for local 
criminal trends, locate mentions of the company and its officers, and perform background 
investigations on security risks. 
 
Networking 
Networking with other security professionals should not be difficult. Local chapters of ASIS, 
fellow CFEs, investigative organizations, and former law enforcement officers’ societies 
deserve full participation. Meetings of technical societies that are relevant to the business 
may also be worthwhile. Even though these meetings may not directly address security 
issues, they provide useful intelligence about the business. For example, if a company 
manufactures chemicals, the security manager could attend the state chemical society 
meeting to learn what is being publicly discussed about her company and the industry in 
general. 
 
Existing Staffing 
An organization’s employees are often its most  neglected intelligence tool. Proper training of 
all company employees fosters the passage of vital intelligence to the security manager or 
investigator. For example, security officers can report patrol observations such as attempts 
by outsiders to search the company’s trash bins. Sales staff can identify incidents when 
strangers have tried to pump them for information at a trade show. Technical personnel 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.853 
might report overly friendly members of the opposite sex who ask too many business-related 
questions at the local watering hole. 
 
Communication with senior management is also essential. If the development of a new 
product line creates new security risks or problems, the security manager, investigator, or 
internal monitor needs to know. Efforts to protect a product prior to market release require 
the coordination of various company departments.  
 
Security Surveys  
Frequent security surveys help reveal potential weaknesses and new threats to any 
organization. They offer insight on where and how attacks might happen, and if a company 
suspects that it has already been infiltrated by a spy, a security survey can help determine 
how that infiltration could have occurred and help focus the investigation on the most 
probable techniques. These surveys provide the security professional with a chance to see 
the business through the eyes of an information thief. A perceptive security manager 
analyzes the company’s business in a creative way, looking through a spy’s eyes for pathways 
to information that might otherwise have been overlooked. If a manager wishes to deceive 
potential information thieves, security surveys can tell where the pickings for a thief are best 
and where to leave the bait.  
 
TESTING THE PERIMETER 
A security survey should begin at the perimeter of the organization. The security 
professional needs to visualize himself as a determined attacker. Do the alarm and video 
camera systems deter from entering the premises without authorization? How easy is it to 
bypass the access control systems? Can badges be obtained without much trouble through 
deception or theft? Are basic defenses (fences, lo cks, barriers, and security patrols) in place 
and in good repair? 
 
PENETRATION TECHNIQUES 
The person performing the security survey should use penetration techniques at various 
times of the day to determine when the company has the greatest degree of vulnerability. Are 
they able to easily walk into the plant on the third shift? Are vendors allowed to wander 
about the facility unescorted? Can a visitor or employee walk unchallenged out of the facility 
past guard stations carrying sensitive documents, computer disks, or a portable computer? 
Are cleaning personnel properly supervised when on-site? 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.854                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECKING FOR UNSECURED WORK AREAS 
Security personnel should also study the way employees’ work areas are maintained. Are 
sensitive documents locked up at night? Are the copy machines electronically locked down 
so a special access card is needed to use them? Do sensitive areas such as research labs and 
computer media libraries have their own separate alarm systems and access controls? Are 
filing cabinets locked at night? Does security do random patrols of the office areas and the 
plant at night? Are all persons in sensit ive areas challenged for proper credentials? 
 
PRETEXT CALLS 
Security officers can determine their organizations’ vulnerabilities to certain external threats 
by calling their own employees at work. It is important to determine what an outsider could 
learn by making pretext calls. Do employees accept what they are told over the phone at face 
value, or do they verify to whom they are talking before giving out sensitive information?   
 
TESTING PROPRIETARY LISTS AND DIRECTORIES 
It is important to make sure that proprietary lists are trapped. Audits of e-mail lists should be 
periodically conducted to ensure that no one plants unauthorized addresses. Are internal 
directories and telephone lists distributed in a secure manner? Is sensitive waste (paper and 
computer media) shredded and disposed of securely? 
 
SECURITY STAFF AWARENESS AND LINES OF COMMUNICATION 
The organization’s security force should have training in protecting proprietary information. 
If something out of the ordinary happens, do they have a means of communicating those 
incidents to management? Is an intelligence collection strategy in place? Will patrol officers 
lock up sensitive documents they find unsecured and make out a report detailing the security 
oversight? Do they know how to check for spy drops? Are they taught to observe suspicious 
activity such as an employee who always works late? 
 
EMPLOYEE SECURITY TRAINING  
It should be the goal of every corporate security office to make sure that employees are 
aware of the importance of security and are trained to protect sensitive information. What 
kind of proprietary information safeguards do employees learn? How regularly do they 
receive training? Are they encouraged to report suspicious activity? 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.855 
MULTIPLE LAYERS OF SECURITY 
There should be multiple layers of security protecting the most sensitive information. The 
layers should become progressively harder to penetrate as one gets closer to the most 
sensitive information. Does the organization have more than one layer of protection for its 
information, and is each layer effective? Or is perimeter security the only real impediment? If 
multiple layers exist, do they offer real impediments to spies, or are they minor hurdles?   
 
Cloaking Operations   
With good intelligence to identify probable channels for information thieves, a security 
manager can commence the cloaking of sensitive operations. Fluctuations in traffic offer 
industrial spies the best indirect insight into a business. Changes in the rates, deliveries, 
shipments, emissions, and the types and amounts of trash can reveal a great deal. 
 
The cost to mask these fluctuations may be significant at times. Appropriate guidance from 
senior management must be a factor in computing the cost-benefit trade-off. If the risks to a 
product line outweigh the security costs, the security staff should begin a cloaking program.  
 
Trash and Waste Disposal 
Trash and waste disposal are excellent places to start. Adding a consistent amount of 
shredded, non-sensitive paper to sensitive document waste greatly diminishes the chance of 
traffic analysis. Non-documentary waste should be secured in a locked holding area. From 
there, it can be sorted into uniform shipment modules before release to the waste disposal 
vendor. When the contents of waste shipments are fairly uniform, deciphering plant 
operations from them becomes much more difficult. 
 
Deliveries and Shipments 
Deliveries and shipments should be made on as uniform a schedule as possible. Ideally, 
organizations should avoid scheduling major deliveries just before a product manufacturing 
run. This is just the sort of tip-off corporate spies are looking for. Maintaining adequate 
inventory levels can go a long way toward eliminating this problem. 
 
If the manufacturing process dictates tight parts delivery schedules, the use of a common 
carrier will at least mask the identity of the supplier to external surveillance. Utilizing a mix 
of common carriers and company trucks helps cloak shipments. Company drivers should be 
trained to vary their schedules and delivery routes. They should also be instructed to report 
any suspicions of intelligence gathering operations. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.856                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hours of Operation and Power Consumption 
During highly sensitive manufacturing, testing, or research operations, the hours of 
operation and levels of power consumption should be kept as uniform as possible. Lights 
can be left on continuously, and some kind of around-the-clock activity can be maintained to 
mask sensitive operations.  
 
Emissions 
If the heightened activity during a crisis period will result in additional smoke or steam 
emissions, the change should be made as gradually as possible. The key is to avoid creating 
an unusual pattern of activity. Management should ease the company into any critical period 
of operations to avoid drawing the attention of the outside world. Similarly, it should ease 
out of the critical period when it is over. 
 
Food Deliveries 
If significant numbers of employees need to work unusual hours in a crisis period, the 
company should provide food service for them from the company’s cafeteria. Increased 
food deliveries to the site can indicate that something out of the ordinary is going on.  
 
Computer Emanations 
If increased computer use creates unusual traffic in emanations, the company can start 
masking it early with a buildup of non-sensitive processing. In addition, appropriate 
shielding will cut down on emanations whenever feasible. 
 
Travel Plans 
Travel by key executives and technical staff offers useful intelligence information to a spy. 
During periods of intense financial activity such as a possible acquisition or merger, meetings 
can be scheduled at neutral locations with short notice to any outside parties, such as hotels, 
travel agents, and rental car agencies. 
 
Use the names of low-profile employees or businesses when booking rooms and travel 
arrangements. Group travel by key executives should be minimized, and the company should 
be sure to stagger the arrival and departure of senior managers at the neutral site. Executives 
should be briefed not to discuss sensitive matters in their hotel rooms or on the telephones 
in those rooms. When feasible, security should be present in the executive’s room when the 
executive is out. If not feasible, the executives should be trained not to leave sensitive 
information unattended in their rooms.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.857 
Technical staff members traveling to research centers or facilities for fact-finding purposes 
should mix in some non-sensitive stops on their itinerary. The additional destinations will 
confuse onlookers in case of possible surveillance. Stops at technical or research libraries to 
do some non-sensitive personal research can leave a spy unsure about which facility on the 
trip was actually important. 
 
Misdirection   
Attempts to compromise employees or information controls demand an immediate 
response. The question is whether to simply shore up security or use the situation to 
misdirect the opposition. Misdirection involves feeding information thieves false facts in 
order to neutralize their intelligence efforts. 
 
Careful guidance from senior management will be necessary. If misdirection is determined to 
be the best way to protect the organization, the false facts that are released must not come 
back to hurt the company, its officers, its stockholders, or its investors. 
 
Assuming that a misdirection policy is approved and carefully crafted, it might work as 
follows. Suppose security has detected an employment advertisement that appears designed 
to lure technical staff to phony interviews so they can be pumped for information. Security 
can go on the offensive to counter this threat by sending technical staff members with 
business intelligence training as decoys. Their goal is to give an impressive technical 
interview that sends the opponent following dead end leads. At the same time, the decoy is 
able to gather intelligence on what the industrial spies are after. This type of information 
strengthens defenses at the target company. 
 
At trade fairs, conventions, and technical meetings, employees should have a prepared story 
to tell industrial spies. When confronted with camouflaged questioning about an industrial 
process, employees can relate information that sounds convincing but that actually leads the 
opposition astray. Again, such misinformation must be sufficiently technical in nature so its 
general release to the public would not damage the company.  
 
Spotting False Suitors 
A tactic sometimes utilized by business intelligence professionals is to initiate false 
negotiations for the purchase of services, product lines, or portions of the target company. 
During the course of the negotiations, the spy attempts to gain valuable information about 
the target, its cost structure, production schedule, manufacturing processes, etc. Other 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.858                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
similar tactics that have already been discussed include spies posing as headhunters, 
conducting false employment interviews to gather information, and posing as a potential 
customer through the use of bogus requests for proposal.  
 
Management and employees should be trained to spot these schemes. False inquiries by 
purchasers can be terminated quickly if organizations require interested parties to 
demonstrate financial qualifications before commencing with any high-level negotiations. 
Financial statements of the suitor should be verified. Similarly, before replying to any RFP, it 
goes without saying that an organization should verify the existence and interest of the 
company seeking proposals. This can be easily accomplished by simply looking up the 
company in the phone book or traveling to its physical address to verify that the company 
exists. A search of state and county records can also be conducted to determine if the 
company is legally registered. Another simple technique is to contact others in the relevant 
industry to see if they have heard of the suitor company. In cases where a spy is posing as a 
representative of an existing company, a phone call to this company to verify the 
information in the RFP will help ensure that the request is legitimate. If evidence suggests 
that the party or company is a false front, security can again take the opportunity to provide 
misleading information to the potential information thieves.  
 
If employees are approached by companies interested in hiring them, similar steps should be 
taken to ensure that these suitors are not actually corporate spies fishing for information. 
Employees should be trained to report suspicious offers by outsiders. Of course, it is 
unrealistic to expect employees to report every job offer they receive or every employment 
interview they take. What organizations can do is train their employees—particularly those in 
possession of key information—to be wary of the deception tactics spies use. It is a good 
idea to explain to key personnel how these schemes are generally initiated, and what 
information the spy will be trying to obtain. Hopefully, this will help employees spot phony 
suitors and report them before any meetings or bogus interviews are conducted. In the 
alternative, employees may at least be wary of suspicious questions during bogus interviews 
and know enough not to divulge sensitive information.  
 
In addition to training key employees to spot deception techniques, it may be advantageous 
to train these employees in some of the simple methods they can use to determine if a suitor 
is legitimate, such as verifying its phone number or address, contacting others in the 
industry, or simply calling the company’s number in the phone book (if one is listed) to 
verify the time of an interview. These are steps that employees can take without having to 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.859 
tell their employer about outside job offers, and which might uncover a corporate espionage 
campaign.  
 
Vendors and Suppliers 
Secondary interviewing of suppliers and vendors by corporate spies poses a problem. A 
company rarely has direct control over what its suppliers and vendors tell third parties. So 
suppliers and vendors should be given information on a need-to-know basis only. 
 
Proper training of purchasing agents is also helpful. Suppliers of highly critical components 
or services need to be signatories to nondisclosure agreements. If intelligence reveals a 
supplier to be a major leak, the short-term answer may be sending misinformation through 
that supplier. The long-term solution would be termination, legal action, or both. 
 
Technical Articles and Publications  
Articles published by technical staff can create cavernous holes in an information security 
program. Staff may unintentionally leak sensitive information as part of an innocent 
academic exchange. The same is true for public speaking engagements. A policy of pre-
 publication review by security personnel and technical management is an absolute must.  
 
While pre-publication reviews of articles and speeches are certainly appropriate, 
organizations should not use technical articles and speeches as a method for disseminating 
misinformation. There are other means for conducting a counterespionage campaign that 
trammel less on issues such as freedom of expression, the right to academic inquiry, and the 
right to be fairly informed.  
 
Consultants 
Consultants can be a source of leaks, and their access to confidential or sensitive information 
should therefore be kept on a need-to-know status. Their activities should be 
compartmentalized as much as possible. As with vendors and suppliers, consultants can be 
fed misinformation if they are suspected of leaking data to a competitor.  
 
If highly sensitive information must be discussed with a consultant, it may be advisable to 
place the discussions in a context that limits the consultant’s knowledge of inside 
information. For example, an expert can tell you what the melting point of a semiconductor 
material is, but they do not necessarily need to know why you need to know that 
information. Obviously, the need to pro tect information must be weighed against the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.860                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business need of consultants to have access to information and a free flow of ideas in order 
to be able to perform their work effectively.  
 
Dealing with Employees Who Are Leaving 
Technical employees who give notice that they are leaving their jobs while working on highly 
sensitive projects should be transferred to non-sensitive projects until their termination date. 
All employees (as well as vendors, contractors, consultants, temporary help, etc.) should be 
required to sign nondisclosure agreements at the time of their hiring. When employees are 
leaving an organization, they should be reminded of their obligation to protect the 
organization’s secrets, even after their employment  ends. It is a good idea to have employees 
sign a statement at their exit interviews in which they affirm that they understand and will 
comply with the terms of the nondisclosure agreements they have signed.  
 
If reliable intelligence reveals that an employee intends to sell the organization’s proprietary 
information, placing misleading information in his hands may dilute some of the impact. 
Planting technical gossip in the company lunchroom, for example, may be an effective 
method for misinforming an employee.  
 
Hackers
If hackers or information thieves penetrate the computer system, security should give them 
something to munch on. The idea is to place worthless, highly technical sounding files on 
the company’s system. If someone signs on from an off-site location and starts to download 
one of these files, security is notified and an investigation begins. 
 
The same tactic applies to PCs. Sensitive data should be placed on disks and locked in a safe 
when not in use. Bogus files containing misinformation can be left on the hard drive for 
prying eyes. If a security manager really wants spies to take the bait, she can add password 
protection to the system to protect the bogus files. The fact that the files are protected helps 
convince potential thieves that they contain valuable information. The same idea works for a 
computer sent out for repair. Placing bogus data on the hard drive prevents service 
technicians from stealing and selling actual company trade secrets. 
 
Another twist on the same theme is to place documents and computer auxiliary items 
containing bogus data in the trash. Auxiliary items include old disks and CDs, old magnetic 
tapes, used computer paper, and other media. This technique is an excellent method for 
managing information thieves who like to go dumpster diving.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.861 
If an employee is suspected of stealing computer files, that individual should be assigned a 
computer with a honey pot of bogus technical information. If the information shows up in 
the public sector, security will know who is leaking the information. 
 
 
Technical Surveillance 
The popular image of the spy, at least as portrayed on television and in the movies, is very 
often associated with all sorts of high-tech gadgets: everything from miniature cameras to 
exotic listening devices to radio wristwatches and telephones hidden in shoes. Obviously, 
many of these devices are fanciful and, while they may provide interesting entertainment, 
they are far removed from the real world of corporate espionage. 
 
Corporate spies do, however, employ various forms of technological surveillance equipment, 
the tools varying according to the needs of the job at hand. In general, corporate spies only 
resort to using high-tech equipment when simpler means are not available to accomplish the 
task. In some cases a miniature camera might be called for to copy sensitive documents, but 
not when a nearby copy machine can be used to achieve the same result. In other instances a 
wiretap may be needed, but only when there is no other means to monitor a subject’s 
communications. Sometimes satellite tracking of motor vehicles becomes necessary, but not 
when simple visual surveillance will tell the spy where the subject has traveled. In other 
words, corporate spies that know what they are doing do not employ technology for the sake 
of using fancy gadgets.  
 
When spies do resort to the use of technical surveillance equipment, it is usually to gather 
nondocumentary evidence, or information that cannot be found through open sources or in 
the target’s files. The methods that spies employ to gather nondocumentary information 
include: (1) taking photographs, (2) conducting surveillance and visual sightings, (3) listening 
to conversations, (4) monitoring computers and computer communications, (5) analyzing 
traffic at a plant, and (6) monitoring emanations from computers and telecommunications 
equipment. 
 
Nondocumentary information has certain advantages. It captures changes over time 
(photographs taken at different times) or processes as they occur (videotaping). Electronic 
surveillance can provide the spy with information that would take many hours of 
documentary analysis to acquire. Aerial photography provides a broad perspective on the 
manufacturing physical plant that is not ordinarily possible with documents alone. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.862                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Intercepting computer communications and emanations can provide an inside look at the 
supply, purchasing, manufacturing, and marketing channels of a target that cannot be 
replicated by another source.  
 
The fact that a technical activity is possible does not mean that it is advisable. Most types of 
electronic surveillance carry potentially serious repercussions. In many cases they are clearly 
illegal. Any prudent spy will employ technical intelligence methods with restraint. Only 
amateurs will rush into a surveillance operation by “bugging” this line and that junction box. 
These novices ignore the fact that the more one bugs, the greater the chances of having the 
surveillance campaign discovered. In addition, a corporate spy with any seasoning will realize 
that indiscriminate bugging produces too much signal traffic to analyze.  
 
Experienced corporate spies know what they are looking for and devise carefully protected 
collection plans before initiating their surveillance campaigns. They know that the more time 
spent planning, the more likely it is that their electronic surveillance will go undetected and 
the greater the intelligence yield will be. The rules most BI professionals use for protected 
electronic surveillance include the following: 
 
If devices (such as microphones or video cameras) are to be left on-site, those devices must 
not be traceable back to the spy or the client. The markings on the equipment must not 
establish a trail on which to build an investigation. Experienced spies use generic equipment 
available from multiple sources. 
 
Wire taps and their associated devices must blend into their surroundings so nothing appears 
out of the ordinary to the layperson. Smart spies do not use contraptions that can easily be 
identified as bugs.   
 
Radio transmitters must not send signals in those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that 
are in common commercial use. Professionals avoid using cellular telephone bands, CB 
channels, or AM or FM radio channels for covert transmissions. They also find out if the 
target site uses commercial two-way radio frequencies and avoid using those bands. 
 
A competent spy does not leave a hard wire connection between the wiretap and the place 
where he conducts listening. If someone located the tap, all that person would have to do is 
trace the hard wire line to locate the spy.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.863 
If the spy conducts off-site reception of computer emanations and signals, the reception 
vehicle or site should have sufficient camouflage or should be adequately disguised to avoid 
any notice or detection. 
 
A good spy never reveals anything about an intelligence campaign to anyone except her 
client, even after the job is finished. 
 
Once a job is finished and a report has been written and delivered to the client, a spy 
destroys all documentary evidence of the campaign. 
 
Aerial Photography
Though its origins lie in the military sector, aerial photography has emerged as a valuable 
tool in business intelligence. Google Earth, a free, online tool that enables users to obtain an 
aerial photo of properties by satellite, has made gathering this type of intelligence quite easy. 
Additionally, there are private aerial photography firms that have fairly complete negatives 
for land in their service area. These firms also accept special assignments to photograph 
specific ground areas on a schedule specified by the client. Aerial photography is used by 
spies to gather information on a competitor’s construction or expansion products, to 
measure the size of its shipments, or to determine the number of employees that the 
company has working, among other things. 
 
Bugging and Wiretapping 
Hidden microphones, wiretaps, and other forms of electronic surveillance equipment have 
become extremely common ways for intelligence professionals to keep tabs on their 
competition. The spy has two primary considerations in a wiretapping campaign: where to 
insert the surveillance equipment and which of the various technologies to employ. 
 
The Insertion Point 
In identifying the insertion point, the spy not only has to choose an area where proprietary 
information is likely to be discussed or displayed on computer screens, but also where 
background noise and electronic interference remain minimal. Spies frequently choose areas 
with proximity to computers and telecommunications equipment carrying proprietary data as 
an insertion point.  
 
Spies may also target areas conducive to employee conversations. This can include any place, 
inside or outside the targeted company, where key personnel gather and chat. Examples 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.864                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
include smoking areas; recreational areas such as bars, lounges, and coffeehouses; employee 
cafeterias; relaxation areas; exercise rooms; and meeting rooms. To target particular 
operations such as information services, spies might wire the offices of key managers, which 
are likely to provide access to a large portion of human information flow. 
 
The Technology 
In determining which technologies to employ, the spy must factor in environmental 
conditions such as lighting (if video surveillance is employed), noise levels, and distance from 
the source. Other factors include the risk of  the sensing device being discovered, power 
supply problems, and access to the device for servicing after installation.  
 
Common electronic eavesdropping devices include: 
• Drop-in telephone bugs  
• Carbon microphones 
• Magnetic or dynamic microphones 
• Electret microphone 
• Spike microphones 
• Cavity microphones 
• Low power consumption transmitters 
• Infinity transmitters  
• Shotgun or parabolic microphones  
• Cellular telephone receivers 
• Video cameras and transmitters 
• Satellite tracking of vehicles 
 
It is not difficult at all for spies to purchase electronic listening equipment. The Internet, for 
example, has a number of sites that advertise vast inventories of equipment ranging from 
audio devices to miniature video cameras to satellite tracking systems. Most of these sites 
urge their customers to use their merchandise only in a legally appropriate manner and 
advertise the equipment for purposes like checking for intruders or ensuring one’s own 
privacy. In truth, however, these devices can and are used by corporate spies to pilfer the 
proprietary secrets of their targets.  
 
Some of the more common forms of surveillance equipment are discussed in the following 
sections.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.865 
SATELLITE TRACKING SYSTEMS 
In most satellite tracking systems, a small transmitter is surreptitiously attached to the 
subject’s vehicle. Common hiding areas include the trunk, inside fenders, or under the rear 
bumper. The transmitter communicates with global positioning satellites (GPS) and converts 
the coordinates of the vehicle onto a map. The spy only needs access to the Internet and a 
password to enter a special, private home page where he can view maps that show the 
vehicle’s location and path. These systems are capable of generating event lists and plain-text 
histories of where the vehicle has traveled. A variation on this tracking design is that in some 
satellite tracking software the system creates a trail of electronic breadcrumbs on the map 
display. The map can be a powerful tool in tracking the movements of executives and key 
company employees.  
 
DROP-IN TELEPHONE BUGS 
Spies frequently use drop-in telephone bugs, which have the advantage of blending in with 
everyday existing telephone equipment. Drop-in bugs are simply inserted into the handset 
device on a normal telephone. The target’s conv ersations are transmitted to a remote 
receiver where they are recorded.  
 
Drop-in bugs are rarely detected because most people never bother to unscrew the plastic 
covers on the handset and perform a detailed check of the internal components. Thus, a 
drop-in telephone bug offers minimal risk of exposure to the spy. When a spy has access to 
the physical premises of a target and wants to be able to listen to conversations on a 
particular telephone line, this device is usually the chosen method of surveillance.  
 
CARBON MICROPHONES 
Carbon microphones, while larger than most spy audio devices, provide good pick-up if 
properly hidden and located. They offer excellent coverage of fixed locations: smoke rooms, 
employee lounges, and other gathering spots. As with other forms of listening equipment, 
these microphones are usually equipped with a transmitter that relays intercepted 
conversations off-site to a recorder. This is much safer, from the spy’s perspective, than 
maintaining a recorder on-site. With a remote transmitter, even if the microphone is 
detected, the recorded material cannot be located or recovered by the target. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.866                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
MAGNETIC AND ELECTRET MICROPHONES 
Magnetic or dynamic microphones can be very  small. They are useful when a microphone 
needs to be close to the speakers and hidden inside something small. Electret microphones 
also provide good close range coverage. Both types of microphones are smaller than the 
standard carbon microphone, though they tend to offer a lower range of coverage. 
 
SPIKE AND CAVITY MICROPHONES 
Spike and cavity microphones work best when the spy has access to an adjoining area and 
needs to penetrate his surveillance into the next room. For example, if a spy has free range in 
a utility room next door or in an adjacent hotel or motel room, a spike microphone can be 
inserted through the adjoining wall to monitor conversations in the target’s room. This type 
of microphone is so small at its insertion point that it is virtually undetectable to the casual 
observer. 
 
INFINITY TRANSMITTERS 
Infinity transmitters are a special kind of device that can be activated from a remote location. 
Once an infinity transmitter has been inserted  in a phone, a spy can call that telephone from 
anywhere in the world and turn it into a listening device. Unknown to the parties present, 
the telephone becomes a hidden microphone. 
 
SHOTGUN OR PARABOLIC MICROPHONES 
For listening to conversations at a long distance, shotgun microphones, parabolic 
microphone devices, and laser audio detection equipment can overhear even quiet 
discussions, provided background noise is not too high. The spy has to be mindful of having 
adequate cover to protect the listening post.  
 
WIRETAPS 
Wiretapping involves splicing a listening or recording device into a wire (such as a telephone 
wire, a PBX cable, an alarm system, or a local area network cable) that is used for 
communication by the target. Standard phone systems, in particular, are very vulnerable to 
wiretapping. Taps are usually placed at the telephone box in the basements of buildings, on 
lines outside buildings, or on telephone pole junction boxes near the target’s offices. The 
different types of wiretaps that can be utilized include: hardwired wiretap, soft wiretap, 
record wiretap, and transmit wiretap. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.867 
Warning Signs of Bugging  
Covert eavesdropping may be difficult to detect, particularly because most people do not 
know what signs to look for. James M. Atki nson of the Granite Island Group, one of the 
leading technical surveillance countermeasures firms in the U.S., has compiled a list of 27 
warning signs that might indicate that an organization is the target of an electronic 
eavesdropping campaign.1 Those red flags are listed below:   
• Others seem to know your confidential business or trade secrets. This is the most 
common indicator of a bugging campaign.  
• Information discussed in secret meetings or contained in secret bids does not remain 
secret. Confidential meetings are among the most popular targets of corporate spies.  
• People seem to know about your organization’s activities when they should not.  
• Strange sounds or volume changes are detected on your phone lines. This is a common 
byproduct of wiretaps or activation of a similar listening device. 
• You notice unusual static, popping, or scra tching on phone lines. This is another 
common sign of a wiretap or bug. 
• You can hear sounds coming from your phone handset when it is hung up. This is 
typically caused by a device called a “hook switch bypass,” which turns a telephone 
receiver into an eavesdropping microphone and speaker and allows a spy to monitor 
conversations near the phone (usually within 20 feet).  
• Your phone rings and nobody is on the other end of the line, but you hear a very faint 
tone, or a high-pitched squeal and beep. This is an indicator of a slave device, or line 
extender being used on your phone line. This is also a key indicator of a harmonica bug 
or infinity transmitter being used. 
• You hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook (by using an external 
amplifier). 
• An office radio suddenly develops strange interference. This could be caused by 
eavesdropping devices that use frequencies within or just outside the FM radio band. 
These signals tend drift and will quiet FM radios  in the vicinity of the bug. To check for 
bugs, look for transmissions at the far ends of the FM radio band, and at any quiet area 
along the FM band. If the radio begins to squeal, slowly move it around the room until 
the sound becomes very high pitched. The radio should be set to the “mono” function 
rather than “stereo,” as this will increase its level of sensitivity.  
• A car radio suddenly starts “getting weird.” Keep in mind that the antenna used by a car 
                                                          
1 This list is provided courtesy of James M. Atkinson and The Granite Island Group, 127 Eastern Avenue, 
#291, Gloucester, MA 01930, (978) 546-3803. (www.tscm.com). e-mail:  jmatk@tscm.com 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.868                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
may be (and often is) exploited by an eavesdropper and that such usage might interfere 
with radio transmission. 
• An office television suddenly develops interference. Eavesdropping devices can tend to 
interfere with television reception.  
• Your office appears to have been burglarized, but nothing was taken. Someone could 
have entered the premises in order to plant a listening device. 
• Electrical wall plates (covering outlets, switches, smoke alarms, and lighting fixtures) 
appear to have been moved slightly. These are among the most popular locations for 
hiding listening devices, which requires that the plates be removed. Watch for slight 
variations in the color or appearance of the power outlets or light switches as these are 
often swamped out by an eavesdropper.  
• A dime-sized discoloration appears on an office wall or ceiling. This is a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed.  
• One of your vendors gives you an electronic device such as a desk radio, alarm clock, 
CD player, or small television. These gifts frequently contain secret eavesdropping 
devices.  
• A small bump or deformation has appeared on the baseboard by the floor. This is a 
strong indicator that someone may have concealed covert wiring or a microphone 
imbedded into the adhesive that holds the molding to the floor. 
• A smoke detector, clock, lamp or exit sign in your office or home looks slightly crooked, 
has a small hole in the surface, has a quasi reflective surface, or otherwise appears to 
have been tampered with. These items are also common places for concealing bugs.  
• Certain items just appear in your office without anyone knowing how they got there. 
Typical items to watch for and beware of are: clocks, exit signs, sprinkler heads, radios, 
picture frames, and lamps. They may contain listening equipment and could have been 
placed in your offices by a spy. 
• Drywall dust or debris is found on the floor next to a wall. This could be a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed nearby.  
• Small pieces of ceiling tile or grit are found on the floor or on a desk. Also, a cracked, 
chipped or gouged ceiling tile, sagging ceiling tiles, or ceiling tiles not properly set into 
track may be observed. This indicates that a ceiling tile has been moved, possibly because 
someone has installed a technical surveillance device above your ceiling. 
• Phone company trucks and utilities workers seem to be spending a lot of time near your 
home or office. These workers could actually be corporate spies in disguise. 
• Telephone, cable, plumbing, or air conditioning repair people show up to work when no 
one called them. This is a very common method for an eavesdropper to plant a bug.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.869 
• Service or delivery trucks are often parked nearby with nobody in them. These vehicles 
may be listening posts for spies. In particular, look for vehicles that have ladders or pipe 
racks on the roof, have tinted windows, and are large enough to conceal a person in  
the back.  
• Your door locks suddenly do not “feel right,” they become “sticky,” or they fail 
altogether. This is evidence that the lock has been picked, manipulated, or bypassed by 
an intruder.  
• Furniture appears to have been moved slightly and no one knows why. Eavesdropping 
devices are commonly hidden behind or inside furniture.  
• Things seem to have been rummaged through, but nothing is missing. This could be a 
sign that someone has been looking through your papers, perhaps even copying them 
before returning them to your work area. The most common “rummaging” targets are 
the backs of desk drawers, the bottom of file cabinets, closets, and dresser drawers. 
• An eavesdropper sends you a copy of your private conversations. As simple as it seems 
this is the strongest indicator, and solid proof of eavesdropping. An eavesdropper will 
sometimes send a victim a copy of a private conversation they intercepted in an attempt 
at blackmail, or in an attempt to terrorize or just stalk the victim. This is commonly seen 
in civil lawsuits, criminal court cases, marital problems, shareholder disputes, custody 
battles, and other situations where one side has a position of weakness and is 
psychologically trying to undermine their opponent. 
 
Preliminary Search Procedures 
If an organization suspects that wiretapping has occurred, there are a number of preliminary 
search procedures that the layperson can perform. This section is not designed to make the 
reader an expert at counter-surveillance techniques; professionals who offer those services 
can easily be located. However, it is quite feasible for an ordinary person to conduct a basic 
search for wiretapping equipment. When conducting an inspection for electronic 
surveillance equipment, be mindful of safety concerns. Never reach into electrical boxes or 
outlets unless you are sure the power is off, and do not grasp bare wires unless you know 
they are not live. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.870                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KNOW YOUR DEVICES 
Wiretapping devices, for the most part, look like hobbyist electronic circuit boards. The 
major difference is that they are much smaller than the circuit boards of the past. Satellite 
tracking equipment is usually housed in small metal boxes about the size of a paperback 
book. They require small antennae that have to face toward the sky.  
 
INSPECTING TELEPHONES 
If the mouthpieces or earpieces on telephone handsets have screw-off plastic covers, remove 
them and make sure no transmitters or unusual looking components are attached to the 
microphone condensers. Also examine the markings on the condenser unit. Do they match a 
condenser from a similar telephone kept in a secure area? If the markings are significantly 
different, have them checked by a representative from the telephone manufacturer. 
 
If the cover on the handset is one solid piece of plastic, look at the two screws that hold the 
plastic plate on. If the screws have scratches on them (e.g., from a screwdriver) remove the 
screws and take the plate off. Examine the condensers for signs of tampering or for 
miniature transmitters.  
 
Examine the back or underside of the telephones. Look for unusual components taped or 
held by a magnet to the back metal plate. Also look for unusual wires protruding from the 
phone. (This means any wires other than the regular plastic sheathed cord that is found on 
all telephones.) If these examinations are negative, then the telephone is probably secure.  
 
If you still suspect the presence of a listening device, do not attempt to disassemble the main 
part of the telephone. You may damage the unit. Instead, look at the screws holding down 
the main body of the phone to the metal plate. If those screws show signs of tampering, 
have someone from the manufacturer examine the unit. 
 
It is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephone attaches to the wall. 
Carefully remove the cover and check for any electronic components inside. In a normal 
wall box, you should only see wires and screw points where the wires are tied together. 
Extraneous components could be electronic listening devices. If you are not sure whether 
the item you have identified is actually a transmitter or microphone, contact a qualified 
                                                          
2 The Granite Island Group, a technical surveillance countermeasures firm, provides photographs of some 
electronic surveillance equipment on its website. (www.tscm.com/whatistscm.html) 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.871 
countermeasures expert, the phone company, or a representative from the phone 
manufacturer.  
 
INTERFACE BOX 
The interface box is a gray box typically located on the side of the building. If a business 
operates in a multiple occupancy structure, the interface box may be located in a utility closet 
close to the company’s offices. In order to ex amine the interface box, unscrew the side of 
the box that is designed for customer access. Look inside with a flashlight. All wiring in the 
box should look the same, using the colors red, blue, green, yellow, and black. You might see 
some striped wires, but that is fine. There should also be a line coming into the side of the 
box from the telephone company. What you should be looking for is a transmitter or some 
form of unusual wiring that does not appear to come from the telephone company and does 
not lead into your building or office. This could indicate a wiretap. 
 
ABOVE THE CEILING 
If an open space exists above the ceiling in your offices, access that area and look around 
with a flashlight. Be on the lookout for everything from sophisticated transmitters to tape 
recorders that are crudely hooked into telephone lines. If listening devices have been placed 
in an attic or in a crawl space above the ceiling, they probably have not been elaborately 
camouflaged. It should not be exceedingly difficult to spot surveillance equipment in these 
areas.  
 
It is a good idea to have the lights turned on in the room below while you search overhead. 
If someone has drilled holes in the ceiling to insert a microphone, the light should shine 
through the ceiling and you will be able to detect the holes. Surveillance personnel frequently 
drill multiple holes before selecting just one as a listening spot or inserting a miniature video 
camera.  
 
OTHER PLACES TO SEARCH 
Use a flashlight to look through the grill panels covering all air conditioning ducts for 
transmitters or listening devices. Carefully inspect all electrical outlets by removing the cover 
plates and looking inside with a flashlight. Examine any central utility closets for unusual 
wiring and electronic devices. Look for signs of  debris on the floor under outlets or light 
switches; this might indicate that someone has removed the wall plates to insert a listening 
device. Any time ducts, outlet plates, light fixtures, or similar items have been searched and 
replaced, their orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.872                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
markers. By shining an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have 
been removed. This technique makes it much easier to determine if someone has tampered 
with those items since the last search.  
 
Look under desks and tables in all office spaces  for electronic devices or wires that seem out 
of place. Do not tear your office apart while conducting your search; feel your way around 
and explore with your hands. Look under and behind couches and sofas. It is especially 
important to closely examine furniture in areas where people are likely to sit and chat. The 
tables and credenzas in meeting rooms should be checked on a regular basis.  
 
Check any television sets, radios, lamps, telephones, computers, clocks, smoke detectors, or 
sprinkler heads in the room. If any areas are served by cable TV, be sure to check out the 
cable lines, converter box, line splitters, and connectors for anything that seems out of place. 
Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed, as unused wiring 
can be used for eavesdropping. 
 
COMPUTERS 
Always check the back of computers for monitoring devices taped to the back panel. 
Examine all connections between the computer and the outside world: lines to printers, 
network cables, lines to peripheral devices, or lines to monitors. Pay attention to any 
connectors that have been placed between the computer and its external lines. These 
connectors may look like they perform a legitimate function, but if the external line could 
have been plugged directly into the computer, find out why the interface was inserted and 
who put it there. 
 
The area immediately around the computer should be checked for unusual wiring, electronic 
boxes, or devices. Any closets or rooms dedicated to housing network equipment such as 
hubs, routers, cabling rigs, or network monitoring gear needs close examination by a 
qualified network technician to make sure no alien electronic devices are present.  
 
Video Surveillance 
The role that video cameras play in the corporate espionage campaigns has several 
dimensions. Microcameras placed in a room of computer screens can focus on individual 
screens and result in the taping of: passwords, logins, user manuals, text specifics, error 
messages, contents of documents, and keyboard overlays during many hours of transactions. 
Cameras can be used to monitor activity on receiving and shipping docks. Planted 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.873 
microcameras can track activity on production lines or presentations in meeting rooms. They 
can also capture executives or key employees at embarrassing moments. Such 
documentation can later be used for blackmail. 
 
Video cameras with a time and date stamp on the footage offer a means of determining the 
security activity in the company. Times of security patrols, access to special areas like labs, 
the emptying of security wastebaskets, and other activities can all be tracked. This 
information can aid a spy in penetrating restricted or sensitive areas. 
 
Photographic Cameras 
Almost as ubiquitous as the bug, the miniature camera plays a lead role in the canon of 
spycraft. Many a motion picture has shown the spy, whether af ter military or industrial 
secrets, bent over documents quickly snapping the shutter. With the tiny cameras available 
today, industrial spies can sneak out of a company’s premises with numerous secrets tucked 
away in a purse or shirt pocket.  
 
Minicameras 
With the advent of copy machines in almost every American business, the need to employ 
the minicamera to capture information from documents dramatically declined. Because 
many sensitive documents are stored in electronic format, computer media such as disks, 
CDs, USB flash drives, and other storage devices have also eroded the need for film 
cameras. Some applications do, however, still exist for the minicamera. Documents such as 
maps, schematics, diagrams, and engineering drawings frequently cannot be easily copied due 
to their size. The minicamera is a viable option for capturing the information on these items.  
 
Concealed stationary cameras with large rolls of film have largely been replaced by video 
cameras. Film is difficult to replace at hidden, sensitive sites. It is also expensive to process. 
Videotape is cheap, needs no processing, and ca n be recorded off-site, far from the video 
camera/transmitter. Thus, even if the target company discovers the hidden video camera, 
the footage will remain safely in the spy’s control.  

Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.874                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Infrared Film 
Infrared film has value when surveillance is done under very low light or when the spy needs 
to examine damaged or erased documents. Even the contents of burned documents can be 
detected under the right conditions with infrared film.  
 
Digital Cameras 
As digital cameras become smaller in both cost and size, they may become a more 
formidable tool in the corporate spy’s arsenal. Digital images are captured on a small disk 
whose contents can be loaded into a computer. The image can be enhanced and manipulated 
using various software programs, thereby offering excellent resolution. The disk carrying the 
stolen image can be carried off and on premises with little chance of detection. 

For any good spy, a good digital camera is the mainstay in his surveillance arsenal. Even if 
extensive aerial photographs are taken, observation of the target site at ground level is 
essential. From the ground view many features like signs, lettering on the side of vehicles, 
the configuration of buildings and streets, license plates, and other important details become 
visible. Photographs of key employees of the target can also be valuable information in many 
intelligence campaigns. 
 
To avoid attracting attention, the intelligence specialist generally uses telescopic or reflective 
lenses to zoom in on details from a safe distance. In building a visual file on a plant site, a 
spy will take ground level photographs from around the entire circumference of the targeted 
area. He will even photograph CRT and computer screens that are visible through windows.  
 
To aid in analyzing photographs at a later date, the specialist will catalogue all photographs 
as to: 
• Subject matter 
• Date/time of day 
• Direction of shot 
• Number in a sequence of shots 
• Important features in shot 
 
This data can be stored in a database like Microsoft Access ®. Photographs themselves can 
be incorporated into the database by scanning them into the computer from a flat glass 
scanner or by loading them from a digital camera. Photographic images, excerpts from 
videotape surveillance, aerial photographs, and relevant diagrams, document images, or 
drawings can be also integrated into one database for extensive analysis. Analytical 
investigative databases like i2 allow for the organization of visual data. A database generates 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.875 
various narrative reports, charts, diagrams, and chronologies. The opportunities for an 
information multiplier effect are tremendous. 
 
Cellular Telephones 
Anyone who conducts a sensitive or confidential conversation on a cellular telephone is 
either highly naive or plain foolish. These transmissions are transparent to the secret services 
of all governments. Any amateur with a receiver can also pick up cellular communications. 
Most corporate spies will, as a matter of course, scan cellular frequencies around a targeted 
plant. They will also focus in on cellular telephone calls by executives and key employees. By 
simple physical surveillance, a spy can observe an executive pull out his cellular telephone in 
the car, in a restaurant, or in the grocery store. This will alert the spy to begin monitoring the 
target’s cellular frequency. Employees should always keep in mind that someone could be 
listening to their conversations. Sensitive information should not be conveyed by cellular 
phone. As with other surveillance equipment, the tools necessary to monitor cellular 
telephone conversations are easy to come by. 
 
Monitoring Computer Emanations  
Digital computers process information with a series of 0s and 1s. These two digits do not 
translate to “on” and “off” states, but rather to high and low currents. These currents cause 
pixels on a computer screen to fire, producing high voltage pulses that emanate into the 
surrounding environment. Computer emanations form a detectable and decodable pattern. A 
detector or receiver, known as a Van Eck unit, can reproduce keyboard entries on a 
computer screen even from a considerable distance. 
 
A Van Eck unit consists of a directional antenna, logic circuits, and two adjustable oscillators 
(one for the vertical and one for the horizontal). With proper adjustments, a van parked 
across the street, equipped with a Van Eck receiver, can decode the emanations from a 
keyboard operator inside a neighboring building. Devices like CPUs, taped drives, disk 
drives, and communications devices all generate electromagnetic radiation, which Van Eck 
receivers can detect. 
 
To prevent competitors from monitoring computer emanations, organizations can shield 
their computer equipment and transmission lines: a process known as Tempesting. While this 
process is used extensively in the military and by certain defense contractors, the costs 
involved prevent many private sector businesses from employing Tempest procedures.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.876                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Tape Recorders 
The best place for a spy to place a tape recorder is off-site, far away from the microphone. A 
transmitter located with the microphone sends a signal to an off-site receiver that is 
connected to the tape recorder. This precaution ensures that a compromise of the 
microphone will not result in capture of the tape. Recorders can also be hooked up directly 
to telephones in order to record tapped phone conversations.  
 
All that is necessary to create a crude wireless phone tap is a capacitor (to block the DC 
voltage from the telephone line) wired in series with a small AM or FM transmitter across 
the telephone wire pair. An AM or FM radio plug ged into a tape recorder picks up the signal 
by taking the output from the radio’s audio ja ck. A professional would not use this kind of 
tap, but a security investigator has to be on the lookout for the amateur spy too. Some 
employees want to get inside information to gain an advantage over their coworkers. 
Bugging the boss’s telephone is a good way to do it. 
 
Computer System Penetrations
In some cases, information thieves will attempt to extract information by penetrating a 
company’s computer defenses. This can be part of an organized intelligence campaign, or in 
some cases it is simply a random attack by a hacker bent on mischief. For more information 
on how outsiders attempt to penetrate computer systems, see the “Computer and Internet 
Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
 
Investigating an Information Theft Case 
Most corporate espionage cases begin with the discovery of the offense. Something is 
missing, or information is out in the public sector. The critical first step is finding out how 
the sensitive information was compromised. K nowing how the data went out the door often 
reveals who stole the secret. For example, if a trapped list becomes compromised, the 
organization will know the list has been compromised because it receives a mailing. From 
the mailing envelope and its contents, the organization will be able to determine who bought 
the list. By checking the company’s internal records, it will be possible to determine who had 
access to the list within the company. So simply by knowing how the leak occurred and that 
someone bought the list, two avenues of inquiry are already established. The company that 
mailed the list should be contacted, and an internal investigation of people who had an 
opportunity to compromise the list should be commenced.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.877 
The first step in any corporate espionage investigation is to determine the means of the 
compromise. Investigators should attempt to rule out accidental and procedural causes first. 
In response to a compromise, the security investigator or auditor will need to do a survey to 
see if inadequate measures are the causative factor. Once the company’s negligence is ruled 
out, the investigation can focus on potential suspects.  
 
Most investigations should begin with the pe rsons closest to the sensitive information and 
then work outwards. For example, if a marketing list were stolen, it would make the most 
sense to first look for suspects among the group that manages the list. Background 
investigations on these employees should be run. Check to see if any of those employees 
have risk factors that would make them likely recruits for corporate spies. Risk factors 
include recent financial or lifestyle changes that appear out of the ordinary. Red flags that 
particularly stand out are employees who suddenly seem to spend a lot more money or work 
a lot of extra hours that do not seem particularly necessary, given the employee’s job. 
 
If the members of the closest circle pass muster, the investigation moves outward to 
consider other employees, vendors, customers, and visitors. For example, a security officer 
might examine visitor logs to see who has visited the marketing group recently. General 
service personnel like the cleaning crew, the copier or computer repairperson, or a delivery 
person who has regular access to the area should also be considered suspects. It is a good 
idea to look for records or observations of suspicious activity, such as people coming in at 
unusual hours, being in places not necessary for their work, pumping employees for 
information, or accessing computer files.  
 
If the investigation fails to develop any leads on employees, vendors, or visitors, then look to 
deception techniques. Re-interview employees in the affected areas to find out if they 
received any suspicious telephone calls, e-mails, or redirecting mail processes at or near the 
time of the loss. Also, be sure to ask employees if anyone has approached them for 
information at trade shows or in social situations. 
 
If deception does not appear to have been the avenue of attack, the next consideration 
should be physical penetration of the site. Review surveillance videotapes of recent traffic in 
and out of the affected area for intruders pretending to be employees. Again, interviewing 
employees may uncover memories of persons who appeared suspicious.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.878                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, an investigator would also check internal records for any incidents of criminal 
activity onsite at or near the time of the loss. Such activity could include a burglary or theft 
that appeared unrelated to information security at the time. It could be a trespassing charge 
or disorderly conduct on company property. Do not overlook intelligence or incident 
reports of security personnel on activities such as people trying to get into the trash 
dumpster and loitering about the parking lot. Conducting a security survey at this stage is 
also a good idea. It will help the investigator detect weaknesses in the organization’s physical 
security and may help point out how an intruder could have entered the site. 
 
After exhausting all other options, consider the possibility of surveillance against the site. If 
sensitive details are going out the door, electronic eavesdropping, Van Eck monitoring, or 
computer system penetrations could be to blame. The response to electronic eavesdropping 
should be a physical inspection of the affected areas and perhaps the engagement of a TSCM 
sweep as outlined later in this section. At the same time, research all records regarding work 
orders or vendor access to the affected areas. This documentation may help identify who 
planted the devices.  
 
 
Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI) 
Companies should develop a program for safeguarding proprietary information  (SPI). Businesses 
should seek out a corporate information officer (CIO) to develop and manage an SPI 
program. An alternative is to hire a security management consultant to develop a program 
and then maintain it on a yearly basis. In either case, the CIO should have information 
management skills and be knowledgeable about trade secret protection.  
 
Task Force 
To coordinate a companywide SPI program, a task force should be assembled. The task 
force should include managers and staff from departments that deal with proprietary 
information such as research and development, and production. The team should also 
include representatives from corporate security, human resources, records management, data 
processing, and legal. 
 
The process should begin by determining what information should be protected. The task 
force should identify those areas that give the company its competitive edge, such as quality 
of the product, service, price, manufacturing technology, marketing, and distribution. One 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.879 
way of accomplishing this is to ask the team, “If you were our competitor, what information 
would you like to know?”  
 
Once these sensitive areas have been identified, the primary focus should be on the 
information security procedures for each department. They should identify where 
proprietary information is kept and survey the risk if such information is lost to  
a competitor. 
 
Employee Awareness 
An effective program must educate employees about security awareness. Employees should 
understand that their professional growth and well-being depends on the success of the 
company. It should be made clear that the success of the company is directly tied to the 
protection of information and data. Employees should be taught how to respond to 
telephone information requests. A procedure should be set out whereby information 
requests are sent to public relations or some other department. 
 
Nondocumentary communications should also be protected. Employees need to know that 
they are accountable for what they say, whether it be over the phone or at a social gathering. 
Employees should never discuss confidential business information at airports, restaurants, or 
any place they could be overheard. They should also be instructed about using a laptop 
computer wherever there may be a chance it could be read in public by someone “shoulder 
surfing.” 
 
Regular reminders of the importance of information security should be published regularly 
in company newsletters, on bulletin boards, or in memos. 
 
Nondisclosure Agreements 
All employees should sign a nondisclosure agreement. Everyone involved with the company 
should sign such an agreement, including subcontractors and their employees, clerical staff, 
consultants, and temporaries. Besides the legal value, a comprehensive nondisclosure 
agreement sends a signal to employees that the company has a tough attitude toward 
preventing leaks. It might also be necessary to have suppliers and distributors sign 
nondisclosure agreements. Although suppliers and distributors have to receive information 
about certain aspects of a business, employees dealing with them should be made aware of the 
potential for misuse of the information and should be instructed to provide them with only 
the information that is essential for them to do their jobs. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.880                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Document Classification 
Document classification is also an important area in a protection plan. Working closely with 
each department, proprietary documents should be classified according to the level of 
security that best meets the company’s need s. For instance, documents may be labeled 
“private” for personnel matters and move up to “restricted” for pricing or marketing 
information. Trade secrets or highly sensitive information might be labeled “authorized 
access only.” Notes and drafts of documents should also be safeguarded or destroyed when 
the final document is completed. 
 
Visitors
Visitor access should be closely monitored. Visitors should be required to sign in and out in 
a logbook, and they must be escorted by their host at all times and should not be allowed 
into areas where there might be sensitive information. 
 
Offices 
Engineering and executive offices should always be locked to discourage browsing, theft, or 
the planting of an eavesdropping device. Keys to office doors should be kept secure. 
Keeping proprietary information and computer disks in locked cabinets greatly reduces the 
risk of theft. 
 
Maintenance Workers 
Management should designate security personnel or someone to monitor maintenance work 
done in areas in which there might be sensitive information. We have all seen scenes in 
movies where the hero, or villain, gains access to confidential information by walking into a 
building or office posing as a maintenance worker.  
 
Meeting Rooms 
Paging systems, background music speakers, and unused wiring can be used for eaves-
 dropping. Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed. A 
mirror and a light affixed to a flexible handle can be used to search for recording and 
transmitting devices in air ducts. After the search, when the duct grills are replaced, their 
orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet markers. By shining 
an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have been removed. Meeting 
rooms should be locked when not in use. If blackboards or flip charts are used, they should 
not face the windows, or the blinds should be closed to prevent observation from telescopes 
or binoculars. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.881 
Quiet Rooms 
A “quiet room” may cost anywhere from $15,000 to $200,000, but the cost may be justified 
depending on the risk involved. A quiet room is acoustically shielded and radio-frequency 
shielded. The room can also be equipped with intrusion monitoring sensors and closed-circuit 
television cameras. 
 
Communications Equipment 
Cellular or cordless telephones must not be used to discuss sensitive business matters. These 
devices are radio transmitters and are frequently monitored by both hobbyists and 
professional information brokers. 
 
Electronic Mail and Voicemail 
For knowledgeable hackers, e-mail and voicemail systems are easy targets. 
 
Confidential information should not be left on a voicemail system. Likewise, it should never 
be left on a home answering machine. Hotels often offer voicemail for their guests. These 
systems require no passwords to gain access to and should never be used for sensitive 
information. Author Michael Stedman reports that when he wanted to interview Robert 
Gates, the former director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), he called the hotel 
where Gates was staying and was given a room number. Stedman said he was astonished 
when he punched the room number into the phone and suddenly found himself listening to 
Gate’s messages that had been left on the hotel’s voicemail service. 
 
To prevent this kind of espionage, instruct staff, family, and friends to never leave anything 
but routine messages on voicemail. Tell them to only leave return numbers, or better yet, use 
a beeper or pager. Make sure voicemail is cleaned out daily. 
 
Computer Systems 
Passwords are the most common defense against computer intrusion, but to be effective, 
they must be used along with good control procedures. Passwords should be as complex as 
the user can memorize, but never less than six random alphanumeric characters. The 
company must change passwords regularly and close them out as soon as an employee leaves 
the organization. Management should train em ployees to log off terminals before leaving 
them unattended. The company can also install an automatic log-off program whereby a 
terminal that is not in use for a certain number of minutes will be automatically logged off. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.882                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A secure encryption device can be employed to protect confidential files, especially when 
transmitting them by modem. Encryption techniques found in popular software packages 
available at a local computer store are probably not secure enough. These programs are in 
wide use and are usually no match for a sophisticated hacker. If files are not encrypted, they 
may be vulnerable to anyone with access to your computer.  
 
A company should also consider the use of virus scanning software. One of the best 
safeguards against viruses or any other kind of data loss is to have a secure backup 
procedure.  
 
Many companies have not yet figured out what to do with the electronic data stored in their 
systems. While some form of paperwork filing or shredding system may be in place, often 
electronic information is organized according to each user’s personal system and deleted 
only when the individual chooses to do so. Even when files are deleted, savvy computer 
experts can often re-create the erased material. This means that everything sent through the 
computer from a birthday greeting to a “smoking gun” document is being preserved. 
 
This is potentially crippling in the event of a lawsuit. Lawyers are becoming aware of the 
storage of data and are requesting electronic evidence in many cases. Lawyers, pouring 
through backups of documents long ago thought deleted, find incriminating memos such as 
“I know this may be illegal, but do it anyway,” or “Please destroy this evidence.” Often such 
documents result in the case being settled for more than it may really be worth because the 
company does not want to run the risk that such documents will inflame the jury into 
awarding large punitive damages. 
 
Companies should institute procedures for deciding what should be kept and what 
shouldn’t. Also, backup files should be kept under lock and key. One 8mm tape can hold as 
much as 1,500 boxes of information. Anyone can grab such a tape and easily sneak it out of 
the building. 
 
Faxing Documents 
Sensitive documents should not be sent through the fax machine unless both machines are 
equipped with a high-level encryption device. Some fax machines are equipped with a 
storage and retrieval system similar to that of voicemail systems. From a remote number, 
you enter a PIN number and stored faxes can be sent to another machine. This allows a 
competitor to be able to retrieve those faxes as well. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.883 
Video Encryption 
Teleconferencing is growing in popularity. Unfortunately, satellite teleconferencing signals 
can be received by millions of home satellite dish owners, some of whom have deliberately 
tuned in to find out things they shouldn’t. Teleconferencing should only be used when there 
is an encryption system in place that will fully scramble both the video and audio signals. 
 
Corporate Telephone Exchanges 
Private branch exchanges (PBXs) are located in a company’s tel ephone closet where wires, 
mounted neatly and predictably upon row after row, lead to corporate executives’ offices and 
other areas of interest to competitors. These rooms should be, but seldom are, locked and 
physically secured. People with tool belts go in and out with little notice from anyone. 
Keeping the eavesdropper out is easier than trying to detect his handiwork.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In one case, a surveillance team found that an executive’s phone line had been tampered 
with. They installed a motion detector in the telephone closet. The alarm sent report-only 
signals to an alarm central station. After two weeks, the central station’s records revealed a 
pattern of early morning visits to the closet  on Mondays and Thursdays. Surveillance was 
set up and the eavesdropper was caught. 
 
Another good idea is to have an escort for anyone entering the area. The identity of the 
worker should also be verified. 
 
Computer-driven PBXs or switches present numerous opportunities for eavesdropping. 
Using an on-site or off-site control terminal, the information thief can hide invisible wiretaps 
among millions of software instruction codes. The hidden codes, for example, could cause a 
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and terminate into a hidden tape 
recorder. 
 
An appropriately trained investigator should regularly print out the user configuration 
instructions. Paying particular attention to those extensions that are likely to be of interest to 
eavesdroppers, the investigator can look for modified instruction codes.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.884                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Trade Shows and Public Events 
Sales materials, trade show exhibits, and the text of speeches should be carefully reviewed 
for information that a competitor might find useful. Employees should be instructed not to 
say anything to anyone that they would not say directly to a competitor. During shows, 
employees should not leave demonstration materials or sensitive documents unattended. 
New design models have been stolen during their transportation in or out of a show. 
 
Foreign Travel 
Corporate executives traveling out of the country should be especially cautious. Many 
foreign governments are unleashing huge and sophisticated intelligence gathering operations. 
Executives should use encryption systems on all voice, fax, or modem transmissions. They 
should also assume that their rooms are bugged and act accordingly. 
 
 
Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey 
If an organization has a reasonable suspicion that it has been bugged, it may be advisable to 
engage an expert to conduct a Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey. 
Commonly referred to as “debugging,” TSCM is designed to help the organization achieve 
two goals: (1) to detect the presence and lo cation of technical surveillance equipment, and 
(2) to identify existing and potential security weaknesses.  
 
TSCM professionals should never be contacted from the area where suspected bugging has 
taken place, as this could alert the spy to the fact that his operation has been discovered. 
Instead, it is recommended that organizations contact TSCM professionals from a secure 
phone, fax or computer that is located far away from the targeted area. Heavily used public 
telephones are probably the most secure method for making contact. Messages should not 
be sent from the home phones or computers of company employees, because they might 
also be under surveillance. In no event should an organization discuss suspicions of 
wiretapping or technical surveillance on a cellular phone.  
 
In choosing TSCM professionals, a company should make sure that the professionals are 
competent in electronics, and have extensive knowledge of design, engineering, and 
maintenance. They must also be trained in eavesdropping techniques, practiced in RF (radio 
frequency) allocation and propagation, and knowledgeable about all techniques of 
modulation, electrical wiring, and installation principles.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.885 
Before conducting an actual TSCM survey, experts start with a pre-inspection survey and 
vulnerability sweep of the targeted premises. The TSCM team usually requires a full set of 
facility blueprints as well as a visual inspection of the premises so that they can obtain a 
complete understanding of the information that spies might target, where the organization is 
vulnerable, and how spies might attempt to penetrate the information security system. This 
phase of the project can take several days, as the TSCM specialists test for weaknesses in the 
facility’s perimeter security, network and communications systems, alarm systems, video 
surveillance systems, and other security components.  
 
Once a vulnerability analysis has been completed and the organization’s risks have been 
assessed, the TSCM search can proceed. A TSCM survey or sweep is a comprehensive 
examination of a facility, designed to make sure that the facility is free of any form of 
technical surveillance equipment. This includes electronic, visual, and physical examination 
of the site. Typically, the sweep begins with an RF examination, in which all radio 
emanations are analyzed to determine their source. An electronically enhanced search will 
then be conducted to locate items or devices that were not detected from the RF search. A 
physical examination will be performed to locate clandestine devices such as recorders, 
microphones, and transmitters. The team will also examine the phones and the phone lines 
to detect bugs. TSCM searches are not only conducted on business premises, but may also 
include the vehicles, cellular phones, computer equipment, and residences of key employees.  
 
TSCM sweeps are sensitive operations that should be conducted with as much secrecy as 
possible. It is best to limit the number of persons within the organization that are notified of 
the operation, because it is always possible that there is a mole within the company. Once 
again, the company does not want to tip off the spy to the operation. TSCM operatives 
normally operate under a cover story to explain their presence at the facility. When possible, 
sweeps are scheduled after hours to limit the number of personnel who encounter the team. 
As with other contractors, TSCM experts shou ld be accompanied at all times during  
their sweep.  
 
Although TSCM surveys can be expensive, if a company believes that it is the victim of 
corporate espionage, it may be the only way to help track down the source of the leak  
of information. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.886                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information 
A company can spend years developing a competitive advantage over its competitors. That 
advantage can be eliminated in an instant by employees walking out the door. 
 
When employees leave a company, there is usually little if any attention paid to where they 
go afterwards. However, if a company begins to notice that a rival is suddenly taking away its 
business, it should sit up and take notice. Often employees leave one company for another, 
and take with them the knowledge of how that particular company operates, its pricing 
policies, its manufacturing methods, its customers, and so on. When employees share what 
they have learned with a competitor, the competitive edge is lost. 
 
Today’s work force is extremely mobile. Employees rarely start with one company and stay 
until retirement. On top of that, companies are continually downsizing and laying off 
employees. In most cases, experienced employees have little choice but to go to work for a 
competitor or begin consulting in their field. Cutbacks and firings do little to foster an 
attitude of loyalty among employees. 
 
Employee Awareness 
Employees must be educated as to what information is proprietary. It is hard to protect 
something if no one knows what needs protecting. A secret formula may be easy to identify, 
but employees are often not aware that subjects they may be discussing over lunch in a 
crowded restaurant are also trade secrets that would prove invaluable to a competitor. It 
does not help that the courts and legal scholars cannot decide on what constitutes 
proprietary information. Definitions of what is a trade secret depend on the organization and 
the industry. Examples of trade secrets include everything from notes in the margin of an 
employee manual to a procedure for tying a fishing lure. In addition, different jurisdictions 
have different laws defining what can or cannot potentially be a trade secret.  
 
Generally, to establish a trade secret, a company has to show that the information is not 
known in the industry, that the company has made efforts to keep it confidential, and that 
the information gives the company some sort of competitive edge. Just because information 
is confidential, does not make it a trade secret under the law. However, even though 
information may not be a “trade secret” as that term is defined under the statutes, it should 
be protected by employees. Again, the best test for deciding what is confidential information is 
to ask yourself if the information would provide an advantage to the competition.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.887 
Nondisclosure and Noncompetition Agreements 
A nondisclosure agreement is a written agreement that employees should sign as soon as 
they start work. It usually provides that all proprietary, confidential, or trade secret 
information the employees learn must be kept confidential and must not be disclosed to 
anyone. A noncompetition agreement is an agreement whereby the employees agree not to 
work for competing companies within a certain period of time after leaving.  
 
General Motors Corporation began requiring its senior-level executives to sign these 
agreements shortly after a well-publicized case against one of the company’s former 
purchasing executives. GM accused the executive  of taking millions of dollars worth of 
proprietary information to his new employer, Volkswagen. GM accused him of pushing up 
strategy meetings before he left so that he could gather even more data. The employee 
denied the charges. GM concluded after this happened that the use of noncompetition 
agreements could help prevent a similar occurrence. 
 
However, the use of nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements is not an overall 
solution. There are several legal problems with using these agreements. As mentioned earlier, 
there is no clear definition of what constitutes a trade secret. In some instances it can be 
extremely difficult to determine what belongs to the company and what belongs to the 
employee. 
 
Noncompetition agreements also have a variety of problems. First, courts in some 
jurisdictions have held that such agreements are against “public policy” because they limit 
the future employment of a person; theref ore, in these jurisdictions noncompetition 
agreements are unenforceable. Others uphold the agreements, but only if they are part of an 
otherwise valid employment agreement. In these cases, the employment agreement and the 
noncompetition agreement must be signed at the same time or the noncompetition 
agreement is unenforceable. In addition, if the employee is an “at will” employee who is not 
covered by an employment agreement, any noncompetition signed by such an employee 
would be unenforceable. 
 
Although nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements can be excellent tools for 
preventing the loss of confidential information to competitors, their use is limited, and legal 
counsel familiar with employment laws for the specific jurisdiction should be consulted. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.888                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
However, many professionals say that the real value of such agreements is not their legal 
power, but their ability to create the right image. This includes making certain that 
employees and outsiders clearly understand that the company is serious about preventing the 
loss of proprietary information and will do everything they can to pursue those individuals 
who are stealing information. 
 
Make Sure Employees Know When Not to Speak 
Often, employees are willing to abide by nondisclosure agreements, but they do not 
understand that the information they are communicating may be confidential. For instance, a 
software company employee who worked on product updates attended a trade association 
meeting and entertained the other attendees with war stories about the development process 
and what things worked and what didn’t. The employee was later reprimanded, and seemed 
genuinely unaware that the information he had provided was proprietary information of 
great value to the company’s competitors. 
 
Exit Interviews
One of the most effective ways to protect a company’s trade secrets and confidential 
business information is to conduct an exit interview. During the exit interview, the departing 
employee should be specifically advised about the company’s trade secrets and confidential 
business information and the obligation not to disclose or use such information for her own 
benefit or the benefit of others without the express written consent of the company. The 
employee should be given a form to sign stating that during the exit interview the employee 
was once again informed that any proprietary information should not be disclosed and that 
the employee agrees not to disclose any such information without the consent of the 
company.  
 
 
Protecting the Trade Secrets of Others 
In the rush to protect its trade secrets from competitors, many companies forget the other 
half of the equation?preventing their employees from appropriating the proprietary 
information of competitors. 
 
If a company hires an employee from a competitor, it should realize that it may be opening 
itself up to a lawsuit for theft of proprietary information. Such claims are expensive to 
defend, and the losses can be substantial even before the jury verdict. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.889 
EXAMPLE 
Diametrics Medical, Inc., a U.S.-based medical equipment provider, was forced to abort a 
$30 million initial public offering after PPG Indu stries, Inc. filed a lawsuit alleging theft of 
trade secrets and patent infringement. Diametrics denied the charges, but the accusations 
were enough to prevent the public  offering from going through. 
 
A company does not have to be actually aware that the employee is using proprietary 
information. There may be liability for willful blindness” that is, company executives had 
reason to suspect that an employee could be using confidential information, but did nothing 
to investigate or prevent it. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Novopharm, Inc. was found guilty by a court in Vancouver, British Columbia, of stealing 
trade secrets from its rival Apotex, Inc. Court documents state that a biochemist left 
Apotex and “secretly joined” Novopharm bringing with him valuable trade secrets. Under 
the verdict, Novopharm must pay damages of  more than $3.7 million. The judge found 
that the chief executive officer, Leslie Dan, “closed his eyes to what was going on around 
him.” Dan denied the judge’s characterization. 
 
Human resources personnel should ask potential employees whether they are subject to any 
agreements that bar them from competing with any current or former employer. If the 
employee is subject to any such agreement, a copy of the agreement should be forwarded to 
the legal department before any hiring decision is made. 
 
If companies seek to use confidential information from former employees of competitors, 
then it may run a greater risk of losing its information to competitors in the long run. As 
discussed above, the most important element of any confidential information protection 
program is the cooperation of the employees. If the employees of a company see that 
management has a policy of pumping new hires for knowledge about competitors, it is 
unlikely that the employees will take pride or interest in protecting the company’s trade 
secrets. 
 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.890                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Legal Issues Related to Theft of Intellectual Property  
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (Title 18, U.S. Code, §§1831-1839)  makes the theft of 
trade secrets a federal criminal offense. Under this statute, the Department of Justice has 
sweeping authority to prosecute trade secret theft whether it is in the United States, via the 
Internet, or outside the United States. This statute is discussed in more detail in the chapter 
on “Law Related to Fraud” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.901 
External fraud schemes are those committed by outside organizations, typically by individuals or 
groups of individuals against organizations. Fraud schemes committed by outsiders usually 
occur in industry. Therefore, the rest of this section is organized by type of industry, starting 
with financial institution frauds. Because some schemes are committed by collusion between 
an organizational insider and an outsider, some frauds can be classified as both internal and 
external schemes. 
 
 



:


theft of intellectu properti
futurist alvin toffler identifi inform as the highest valu commod for the new
millennium he specul that multin corpor secur depart might evolv
into privat armi to protect their compani asset where host countri cannot
the world ha inde becom a more complex and competit place individu corpor
organ have becom more power than some entir nation and the balanc of
econom power ha shift to the corpor within which idea and inform have
becom the most highli prize asset inde with more valu than a compani product
or physic asset
to a consider degre busi administr and societi as a whole have come to
depend on the effici and secur of inform technolog result in inform
acquir a new and distinct valu that cannot be protect in the same wai as
tangibl object
inform exist in mani form and it secur is achiev by implement a process of
risk assess and commensur control to ensur the preserv of
confidenti ensur that inform is access onli to those author to have
access and that thei can onli us it for specifi purpos
integr safeguard the accuraci and complet of inform and process
method and
a vailabl ensur that author user have access to inform and associ
asset when requir
intellectu properti is a catchal phrase it is us here to denot knowledgebas asset
and capit includ inform but extend to idea design and innov
howsoev express or record
thi chapter address the broad issu relat to the vulner and critic of
inform and other intang properti it advoc a mix of procedur logic and
physic protect measur to combat threat pose by oppon who make it their
busi to try to obtain an advantag by illeg or uneth abus intellectu properti
belong to anoth
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1802 2011 fraud examin manual
competit intellig ci versu espionag
histori is us to the practic of intellig or what the duke of wellington describ as
know what wa over the other side of the hill intellig and espionag transfer
from the militari to a civilian set with the return of servic personnel from world war ii
and integr itself with the econom environ through manag educ which
wa focus on strategi and extern influenc
thi approach to intellig wa formal by on of the earli propon of busi
intellig dr gerald albaum who realiz that compani had a need for a more
organ and systemat method for gather process analyz and report
inform about competitor
ci ha been defin as the analyt process that transform disaggreg competitor data
into relev accur and usabl knowledg about competitor posit perform
capabl and intent yet in todai market thi is not enough compani ar face
with three influenc factor custom competitor and chang these forc ar
modifi the face of corpor strategi drive the compani of todai deeper into
unfamiliar and frighten territori to address these fear compani ar now adopt
organ busi intellig system to monitor the environ in which thei do
busi
ci is a legitim busi function that sit comfort alongsid market and research
and develop as well as gener busi strategi and the newer disciplin of knowledg
manag it help busi to anticip a competitor research and develop
strategi determin it oper cost price polici and financi strength as well as it
capac knowledg about competitor is on of the advantag that can enabl compani
to succe and lead the field in their respect market place
ci ha becom a growth industri that is practic by profession train to us
inform in the public domain or to otherwis util legal avail resourc to
compil inform thi inform is then collat process and dissemin into
intellig that is usabl and ha strateg valu gather intellig is not espionag if
the collect effort is done without recours to crimin method or intent ci practition
mostli work within a code of ethic drawn up by the societi for competit intellig
profession scip thi strict code includ the requir that member identifi
themselv dure an inquiri and do not us decept in their quest for such inform
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1803
to the detriment of the reput of fraud examin and ci profession certain privat
investig and inform broker access financi and crimin inform and other
protect data and gener disregard the law govern data protect convers there
ar firm that will us quit aggress techniqu to investig a client organ
oppon while not conform to the scip code of ethic these techniqu ar not
illeg and firm us these method appear to be prepar to stand by their techniqu in a
court of law thei provid a valuabl servic to their toptier client mani of whom do not
believ that all evid of malpractic is reflect sole in book and record
there is therefor a world of differ between competit intellig and espionag
espionag mai be defin as intellig activ direct toward the acquisit of
inform through clandestin mean and proscrib by the law of the countri against which it is
commit it doe not cover legitim intellig collect and analysi us legal mean
espionag can be further subdivid into industri espionag and econom espionag
industri espionag refer to the clandestin collect of inform by compani and
individu such as inform broker about competitor econom espionag refer to
state sponsor or sanction collect which is often associ with a nation foreign
intellig servic
open sourc of inform
open sourc inform is inform in the public domain or data that is legal avail
to anyon spi do not have to penetr corpor secur measur to obtain thi type of
inform it is avail to anyon who want to collect it the term public howev
doe not necessarili mean free mani sourc have access charg that mai be simpl low
cost copi fee or rather substanti databas expens
the divid line between open sourc inform and other target of corpor
intellig such as trade secret is the right to access a member of the public can obtain
open sourc data openli without fear of legal consequ and the provid of the data
desir or ha no object to it releas into the marketplac trade secret ar the exact
opposit no on but the owner ha the right of access and the owner ha no desir to cast
the trade secret freeli upon the marketplac water the take of trade secret without the
owner permiss violat both state and feder law known as econom industri or
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1804 2011 fraud examin manual
corpor espionag theft of trade secret is a form of busi intellig that goe far
beyond open sourc research
most of the inform sought on ani topic accord to intellig profession is
publicli avail estim go as high as 95 percent as to what is discover in the
public sector
there is onli so much that secur profession can do to limit the open sourc
inform that is avail on an organ some form of inform such as
financi statement of publicli trade compani ar legal requir to be publish other
piec of inform such as product descript or job list ar post out of busi
necess corpor secur profession do not oper in a vacuum the need to protect
an organ secret must alwai be ba lanc against the need or duti to publish
inform on of the first thing secur prof ession must do is realiz that thei cannot
protect everyth
with a thorough understand of how ci practition us open sourc inform
howev secur offic can limit their compani vulner to the disclosur of secret
through accid or neglig the knowledg secur profession will identifi kei
inform asset then review the open sourc inform that is avail on the
compani from a spy perspect to see if the safeti of those asset could be endang
the secur profession will also be abl to work with other depart to limit or edit the
inform that is avail on the organ so that no inadvert gift ar made to
potenti intrud final if a theft of inform should occur understand how open
sourc ar us mai help a secur offic track down the perpetr
why do compani resort to corpor espionag
if so much li out there why do peopl pai for industri and corpor spi why do
thei bother with illeg method why do compani not stick to standard research to learn
what thei need about their competitor and why do thei us intellig agent and analyst
instead of routin research the answer to these question is twofold
first even if the intellig gather adher strictli to us onli open sourc mere fact
do not constitut intellig or knowledg collect raw data bring on onli to the
threshold of the process data must then undergo analysi to be turn into a us
product analysi involv summar compar and explain the data the craft of
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1805
intellig li in the abil of the provid to distil mountain of fact from divers
sourc into a concis product that is action by it consum
the term action mean the product must have the depth charact and qualiti on
which an execut mai base sound decis mere know what on competitor ar
up to fall short of the mark good intellig identifi the action an execut should
take to seiz an opportun or to diminish or elimin a threat it is good to know what the
problem is but far better to know how the problem can be solv even though open
sourc ar avail to the gener public organ still util intellig profession
skill to creat action intellig from the mass of public inform
the second reason organ util intellig profession is that the remain five
percent of need inform is proprietari thi last segment often becom critic to
competit surviv and organ or individu ar sometim will to sidestep the
law to obtain it intellig profession know the trick of the trade for gather
sensit proprietari inform that can give their client a competit edg
while legal protect exist for trade secret and other proprietari inform smart
organ do not passiv reli on the threat of civil action or crimin penalti to
protect their inform asset rather thei take affirm step to erect their own
secur barrier around their critic proprietari inform such barrier dramat
increas the cost never mind the legal liabil of obtain protect inform
if a compani or foreign intellig servic must have the trade secret of a target to
complet the inform pictur thei ar formul thei must be will to invest in
mani case thi mean emploi the servic of intellig profession util
experi and train the intellig profession conduct a campaign or mission us
secur method to protect the collect effort prevent legal repercuss for the client
there is a cost factor involv in intellig gather which tend to keep compani and
corpor spi from rush into covert proprietari intellig activ a wise intellig
campaign will util open sourc at least initi as much as possibl onli when the
effort can go no further and busi need dictat acquir addit inform doe
intellig gather enter the proprietari realm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1806 2011 fraud examin manual
the bootstrap effect
with an understand of the intellig process it becom clear that open sourc plai
two import role thei mai in some case provid all the basic intellig a compani
need a skill intellig analyst us logic and the principl of infer to summar
compar and explain ani miss piec in other word the compani never ha to ventur
on the high sea of espionag it satisfi itself in the safe harbor of open sourc it learn
what it need to know at low cost and by legal mean
but if penetr the proprietari realm becom necessari open sourc inform
provid a bootstrap for the covert effort the more on know about a subject the easier it
is to discov addit inform on that subject open sourc serv as the homework a
corpor spy doe prior to conduct covert oper in hostil territori
as ani filmmak know the more time spent in preproduct which is rel
inexpens the less time and monei will have to be dedic to product which is veri
expens the profession filmmak doe hi homework befor shoot a foot of film
likewis the profession corpor spy doe not just show up at the target factori at 3
am arm with a crowbar clumsili try to break into the facil
instead the effect spy obtain plan on the layout of the target plant in advanc note
what type of alarm system is in place learn about ani secur patrol and then devis an
appropri penetr plan but unlik a common thief the effect spy set that plan
asid and first consid other optionsless blatant mean that mai exist to ferret out the
soughtaft inform the spy understand that inform is a uniqu commod and
the theft of inform can be accomplish in a number of uniqu wai often
inform can be stolen without the target realiz it copi or photograph can provid
access to sensit fact without requir the sourc document or file to ever be remov
from their owner control burglari someth the polic understand and take great interest
in is not alwai the best wai to steal inform
the intellig pyramid
leonard fuld in hi landmark book competitor intellig argu that open sourc exist at
three level form an intellig pyramid at the base of the pyramid ar fundament
intellig techniqu the second level is compos of basic sourc of inform and
the final level is creativ sourc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1807
fundament research techniqu
the initi level of the intellig pyramid is compos of fundament research
techniqu which includ research articl in magazin journal or newspap and
consult industri guidebook these fundament sourc of inform allow the spy to
build a partial pictur of the target and equal import to develop checklist of the
inform need to fill in the blank space these checklist ar veri import becaus
no intellig effort should proce without precis goal for a spy to be effect he
must know exactli what is sought vagu expedit for inform will produc vagu
result so a shop list becom an absolut must a competit intellig ci
profession mai spend mani hour meet with a client discuss in exact detail the
specif of the mission if the client is not clear on the object clarifi that issu
becom the first order of busi
basic sourc
after establish clearli defin goal the ci profession craft a collect plan in a well
organ intelligencegath plan the ci profession move up the pyramid collect
addit inform while continu to narrow the focu of hi search after exercis
fundament techniqu the second level of the pyramid involv access basic sourc
these sourc includ some that ar alreadi familiar
govern sourc
sec from the edgar databas wwwsecgovedgarhphtm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1808 2011 fraud examin manual
10k annual report
10q quarterli report
proxi statement
13d major stock acquisit
14d tender offer
state corpor file
corpor registr
ucc file
regulatori file profession licens etc
officerdirector od databas
industri report and studi
industri analyst report
state industri directori
trade and busi magazin
statist sourc exampl standard rate and data servic advertis
trade associ from the encyclopedia of associ and directori in print
provid by gale industri
databas with stori
thomson research httpresearchthomsonibcom 3500 research report ar
ad to thi sourc daili
datatimesful text newspap
govern sourc
sec file
publicli trade compani ar requir to make certain file with the sec these
document can be extrem help to the spy seek to build a financi profil on the
target inform such as annual and quarterli report on publicli trade compani can be
access for free through the sec edgar system at wwwsecgovedgarshtml
through thi avenu the spy can obtain the target form 10k which contain the
compani incom statement and balanc sheet inform on it debt structur foreign
ownership properti own subsidiari industri descript depreci dilut and
other kei busi inform if the target compani ha file for bankruptci been the
target of a sharehold lawsuit or been su for patent infring thi mai also show up
in the 10k most publicli trade compani must also file 10q which ar statement of
quarterli incom earn per share etc ot her form that ar avail from the sec
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1809
includ proxi statement which provid inform on stockhold vote taken on kei
issu and form 13d and 14d which indic major movement in stock ownership that
ar pend
state corpor file
state requir that compani that do busi within their jurisdict regist each year
with the state govern usual through the secretari of state offic thi requir
extend to all compani oper in the state not just those that ar publicli trade
mani secretari of state websit have enhanc search capabl for busi
organ includ search by entiti name and by name of the person list as a
regist agent offic or director of a corpor thi search capabl allow an
intellig analyst to find all the compani within a state in which a person serv as an
offic or as a director a search can help the ci profession develop a famili tree of the
offic busi interest it becom a us tool for uncov lesserknown or hidden
connect between busi the financi strength of a target busi often li in it
affili or subsidiari which rise to the surfac in an officerdirector search
industri report and studi
state and feder govern period issu industri report and studi on variou
industri rang from applianc manufactur to high technolog compani these
studi provid statist benchmark us to establish where a compani stand in it
industri in addit thei help delin the standard for evalu success compani
in that industri state industri directori special industri issu in magazin like fortun
and forb and directori from trade associ serv the same function
industri analyst report
there ar a number of industri analyst report that ci gather us to estim unknown
figur in a target balanc sheet the standard rate and data servic for instanc provid
inform on advertis rate that mai help a spy benchmark the target expenditur on
advertis an indic of the organ financi health for practic ani industri a
statist sourc exist that serv as a power estim tool for ci analyst
industri analyst report from invest firm when properli research and written ar
akin to have a person intellig brief about the target strive for a balanc
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1810 2011 fraud examin manual
present thei aim to tell both the good and the bad about a compani thei often
contrast sharpli with the compani annual report
electron sourc
electron sourc of data ar some of the most power research tool in the intellig
analyst arsen these resourc which includ cdrom and onlin databas contain
compil of data on bankruptci new busi file telephon directori ucc
file crimin record corpor data and mani other type of inform if on
includ the mani local region and nation newspap avail electron the
research capabl of on intellig analyst sit at hi comput ar truli stagger
larg public or univers librari frequent provid free network access to newspap
magazin and other journalist sourc more inform about electron sourc is
contain in the access inform onlin chapter in the investig section of the
fraud examin manual
multipli effect
analyt softwar produc a multipli effect when process case inform thei
gener output greater than the individu input of inform fact a b c and d
stand by themselv mai offer minim insight but when combin and organ those
fact can gener an understand of what is realli go on in an organ the
analyst notebook by i2 for exampl is popular among polic intellig analyst
becaus it can track pattern and linkag from larg databas further inform about
these type of product is contain in the data analysi and report tool chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual
the function perform by analyt softwar program can easili be translat to busi
intellig need uncov pattern relat to corpor file od search patent and
trademark applic and other divers compil of data that when piec togeth
can indic the potenti direct in which a competitor is head for exampl some
softwar program can be design to cross check patent author extract from a patent
databas against an officerdirector search to show the compani for which kei scientist
serv as director the softwar also gener visual displai of the relationship between
the compani all of thi make the corpor spy task of unearth hidden relationship
and confidenti fact easier
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1811
creativ sourc
the final step in the open sourc intellig pyramid is the us of creativ sourc leonard
fuld list the follow type of inform as exampl of creativ sourc classifi ad
environment impact statement close examin of ucc file proxi and the
build of financi statement
classifi ad
employ advertis in particular can provid valuabl inform about the job
skill that a target compani need and the number of employe it is seek to hire thi
can help a spy infer what kind of new project ar be develop within a compani or
where personnel resourc ar be devot largescal hire could indic that a
competitor ha sign or expect to sign a larg contract in some case employ ad
also point out defect of kei personnel
employ ad also give a spy an indic of what the target compani pai it
employe thi could be valuabl for the spy employ in recruit battl for covet
personnel it could also help the spy identifi employe who mai be suscept to
recruit tactic becaus of low pai or a high rate of employe dissatisfact as
evidenc by a high rate of turnov in a particular depart
environment impact statement
environment impact statement contain larg amount of histor financi and
oper inform the compani file the statement not onli ha to suppli thi
background data on itself but it also ha to explain it propos project in detail those
detail on emiss hazard materi us and possibl accid stem from
oper provid a wealth of fact for analysi by an expert from such analysi a ci
profession can develop an excel pictur on the size and oper capabl of a plant
or compani veri often thi kind of inform can allow on competitor to establish
the date oper will begin at a target plant
ucc file
ucc file in addit to financi data previous discuss provid oper detail by
describ equip and materi that have been purchas or pledg for a loan
sometim previous unknown asset and ti to other busi will be list in the
file ucc file ar made at the counti level or with the secretari of state depend on
the natur of the collater provid as secur in a financ agreement savvi intellig
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1812 2011 fraud examin manual
profession review these document with a finetooth comb for tidbit of inform
that can help them gain an understand of a target busi transact
proxi
develop proxiespeopl who work with the target on a daytodai basishelp ci
profession color in mani necessari detail supplier in particular can be a rich sourc of
insid inform about a target busi supplier spend signific time and resourc
to learn about their custom thei know what a custom order when thei place order
how much thei spend how long thei take to pai their bill and what the busi cycl of
the custom industri is interview with these person can be an invalu sourc of
inform for a corpor spy
pose as a custom
if a spy cannot cultiv or bribe kei employe of a supplier he mai pose as a custom
himself he can exploit the two fundament axiom of corpor espionag 1 all
salespeopl want to make a sale and 2 all salespeopl will do almost anyth to make a
sale includ talk their head off about what theyv done for other custom
in a prospect sale meet the spy arm with busi card and even a brochur
about hi compani convei that he work for a prosper busi he can even pick a
legitim busi with a good db rate and pose as it employe dure the cours of
the meet he can ask what the supplier ha done for other custom he will casual
mention that he ha a friend who work for the target compani how well ha the supplier
serv that busi as an addit enticemen t the spy can place on the tabl impress
look spreadsheet show financi data and product run level and ask if the target
level of busi match these figur the spy tell the salesperson that he just want to see
if the supplier ha the experi necessari to handl hi busi
build financi statement
the on piec of inform desir univers by consum of intellig is the financi
statement at time the balanc sheet becom the holi grail a magic kei that open all
sort of door to understand a busi spi can of cours steal balanc sheet and
other financi document but often the theft is not worth the risk larg publicli own
compani ar requir by law to publish their financi statement thi inform is
freeli avail on the sec edgar databas even larg privat own compani
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1813
frequent leav enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figur out their financi
postur is not terribl difficult more difficulti gener aris when the ci profession
seek to build a financi profil of privat small and mediums compani the financ
in these compani ar usual held close to the vest get in proxim to kei financi
document mai be riski given that a limit number of peopl in these compani have
access
a much safer approach li in estim the balanc sheet with research method everi
good ci specialist know how to perform thi procedur the techniqu form a central tool
in the intellig profession arsen the process by which balanc sheet ar estim
afford an insid look at the open sourc process us by ci profession
it is import to rememb that the financi statement that the ci profession build ar
noth more than estim of a target fi nancial statu confirm those estim by
gather further intellig is an option but the process begin as a refin educ
guess while onli a guess a wellcalcul estim mai provid all the inform need
by the client and thi method involv a consider lower degre of risk than outright
theft of the soughtaft inform
the ci specialist must alwai be awar that financi statement tell onli part of the stori
about a compani he know to evalu them in the light of other inform such as the
histori of the busi the condit of it market technolog develop and the
condit of it supplier quit frankli estim work best when done on manufactur
compani the input and output of a manufactur firm ar easier to spot track and
measur than with servic compani servic compani howev can be compar to
other similar busi by size locat and number of employe if the financi of the
similar compani ar known then an educ infer can be made about the target
financi statement for the purpos of the discuss in thi section and in order to best
illustr the method us by intellig profession the hypothet target will be a
manufactur compani
how incom statement ar calcul
to build the financi of a manufactur firm spi first calcul the incom statement
thei break down an incom statement into three compon 1 revenu 2 cost of good
sold and 3 overhead
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1814 2011 fraud examin manual
revenu estim
revenu estim can come from state air pollut control permit applic hazard
materi permit applic articl in the local press about sale volum state industri
directori or by indirect method on of the most common indirect method for
estim revenu is to count truck activ at a site both receiv and ship over a
given period of time know the ship dimens and retail cost of the compani
product a spy can estim what each truck hold the same goe for railcar and ship or
barg talk to truck driver railroad personnel and longshoremen can also fill in detail
on the size of outgo load and their frequenc in the servic industri revenu estim
ar frequent made by conduct interview with supplier custom or employe of the
target pretext call and social engin might also be us to trick employe into
divulg kei financi inform
cost of good sold
labor cost can be deriv by a spy from wage list in newspap classifi ad and from
wage survei at the local chamber of commerc the state workforc commiss will also
have wage survei for certain occup the number of employe for the target can be
gather from osha occup safeti and health administr record and by
count car in the park lot for each shift
determin indirect labor cost can be accomplish in sever wai the best method is to
consult statist manual for the target ind ustri which give the respect percentag of
direct and indirect labor cost in addit estim the number of manageri and
profession worker enter the plant will suppli a guidelin spi look for clue such as
the type of car that employe drive a saab or a pickup truck the cloth thei wear a
suit or overal and the item thei carri to work briefcas and laptop or lunchbox
the chamber of commerc mai also be abl to suppli the number of salari personnel at
a plant
the type and amount of raw materi us at a plant mai be avail from the state air
pollut control board or the local fire depart hazard materi unit surveil
of truck deliveri to the site is anoth sourc the cost of materi is avail from
supplier or their catalog
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1815
overhead
overhead cost such as advertis deriv from manual discuss earlier such as the
standard rate and data servic calcul util cost is as simpl as call the local
electr ga or water compani while a util compani mai not reveal what the target
consum directli it will disclos what an averag compani of that size in that industri
purchas annual newspap ad and real estat broker serv as sourc on the cost of
leas plant facil the local tax assessor can suppli the valu of properti own by the
target mortgag inform will be avail from real estat record at the counti clerk
offic
debt of the target busi emerg from research ucc file bond rate manual
state econom commiss record if the target is big enough and from the state secur
board file of privat place prospectus
how balanc sheet ar calcul
from these variou sourc a competit intellig analyst can compil a preliminari
incom statement the element of a balanc sheet deriv from the incom statement with
the help of financi tool such as db industri norm and kei busi ratio the
process of deriv the balanc sheet begin by take a known figur for instanc sale
and look up the ratio for the target industri between sale and net worth the
intellig profession simpli need to do some simpl algebra divid the sale figur by
the ratio to deriv the unknown which is the net worth
a similar procedur work for other standard ratio the rule of thumb is that if a person
know the annual sale the line of busi lob the number of employe and how long
a compani ha been in busi then that person will be abl to creat a reason balanc
sheet estim an analyst will compar the estim against known or publish balanc
sheet of similar size compani in the same lob to check accuraci consult expert on
the industri bank loan offic invest analyst provid further confirm
nontradit sourc
a spy or intellig analyst bolster data develop from public record and estim
financi statement by access lesserknown sourc histor archiv center like the
center for american histori at the univers of texa at austin have larg collect of
old telephon directori industri and corpor directori and busi refer work
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1816 2011 fraud examin manual
these materi enabl a research to trace the histori of a busi or a person
associ with that busi thei also serv to track the growth of a busi over time
chang in yellow page list in telephon number and in statist in state
manufactur directori can be chart to show longterm trend for the busi these
archiv also document where a person serv as an offic as a kei employe or ran their
own busi
thomson gale a publish of mani fine refer book ha two work of primari interest
to ci specialist directori in print ha over 16000 entri for everi kind of directori
imagin includ busi and industri directori profession and scientif roster
foreign directori and other list and guid ani good ci specialist know that a good
trade directori save valuabl research time in addit most directori gener run ad
from supplier to the industri so the industri directori serv as an inform refer book
for locat supplier these directori ar also a strong wai to do background research on
an industri and to learn the buzzword and kei concept govern that busi after
review the directori a spy will be abl to talk like an insid
thomson gale also produc the encyclopedia of associ in region nation and
intern edit from these work a ci specialist can locat expert and resourc in
almost ani busi field or manufactur line contact expert for interview by
telephon is a fast inexpens wai to confirm estim and research find from open
sourc the encyclopedia also list annual meet of organ and their kei offic it
serv as a sourc to identifi expert their trade show and relat seminar savvi ci
profession will touch base with profession prior to an annual meet or seminar thei
strike up a profession relationship in advanc so when thei meet at the convent thei
ar in a posit to comfort chat with target profession and draw out kei
inform virtual everi text on competit intellig mention attend trade show
but few mention do the necessari homework befor attend good spi do their
homework on whom to contact by us thomson gale or similar sourc as a start
point
infotrac
spi also do their homework by us infotrac a larg famili of databas from gale
research on thing about these databas that make them especi attract to spi is
that most librari have them avail inhous usual on a cdrom network for us at
no charg sinc thei index abstract and provid full text on hundr of public the
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1817
competit intellig research essenti ha a multitud of field agent work for
them keep in mind the estim that 95 percent of need inform li in the public
domain infotrac databas form a good middl tier sourc the inform that infotrac
commonli provid includ
number of employe
manufactur capac
product line
level of expertis within the compani
market
market posit
kei product
internet particip
product detail
competit advantag
a closer look at databas
there ar three tier of electron databas 1 the internet 2 infotrac databas and
refer work like the million dollar directori on cdrom and 3 commerci
databas such as dialog profound lexisnexi and db dun bradstreet
electron databas
first tier
exampl
the internet
advantag
quick easi to us usual free
disadvantag
chaotic organ inform
not alwai current or reliabl
second tier
exampl
infotrac
million dollar directori
acl
advantag
fairli easi to us avail at larg
public librari usual free access
inform reason reliabl
disadvantag
expens subscript rate so
not alwai practic as an inhous
sourc for secur unit
third tier
exampl
dialog
lexisnexi
db
profound
advantag
most us power search engin
or have vast databas capabl of
highli refin conceptu search
disadvantag
can be veri expens for
intellig and secur unit
howev these databas
repres an emerg tool for the
futur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1818 2011 fraud examin manual
first tier databas
competit intellig involv more than just surf the net of cours ani ci
specialist will be well acquaint with web search engin like googl yahoo lyco
altavista metacrawl and northern light these engin ar us for locat the
highlight on the internet howev with url constantli chang and the qualiti and
depth of data on the internet be highli variabl the internet is just a first step for ci
work
second tier databas
as indic abov more indepth cleaner and better organ data li in middl tier
databas such as infotrac while hypertext link on the web afford the user the abil to
establish hi own pathwai through inform thi mode of search often lead to
haphazard lengthi and even chaotic journei middl tier databas provid wellorgan
carefulli index data that take less time to search and carri a greater inform
punch becaus intellig frequent ha a short halflif time can be a veri critic factor
for intellig specialist the more quickli a search is complet the more valuabl is the
inform obtain
third tier databas
competit intellig campaign frequent oper under a short time frame find out
if a competitor is about to expand product for instanc mai onli be valuabl if the spy
learn in time for hi employ to beat that rival to the punch becaus time is frequent a
critic factor in an intellig campaign analyst tend to us the third tier of databas as a
central tool those emploi the most sophist search technolog includ dialog
choicepoint db and lexisnexi these databas ar gener abl to provid more
us inform in less time than lower tier altern
newsgroup
spi also util search engin specif gear to scan newsgroup on the internet
these site can contain immens amount of intellig inform when peopl start
chat on the internet thei frequent reveal a great deal about what thei ar work on
exampl of thi type of search engin includ googl wwwgooglecom and supernew
wwwsupernewscom
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1819
db and lexisnexi
db and lexisnexiss busi and market databas emploi convent search
technolog that both fall in the upper tier due to their vast a start point for
research almost ani busi is a db report if the report is lack there is probabl
not much out there on that compani with million of record these databas ar us in
develop histori and background on compani and offic lexisnexi ha so mani
period and transcript on it databas that it is on of the best commerci intellig
databas in the world
i2
as previous mention i2 also figur into the databas equat it can perform pattern
develop function similar to other toplevel databas the trend of do more with
open sourc and squeez addit inform out of them is grow rapidli in the ci
commun the multipli effect discuss earlier is clearli at work inform organ
and crossreferenc intern gener knowledg that can help a client make a decis or
that can support and enhanc further intellig effort
competit intellig websit
in addit to the tool discuss abov ci profession can util a number of websit
that provid free inform about how to conduct busi intellig oper mani
of these site will take a visitor stepbystep through intellig techniqu and strategi
a corpor spy us open sourc what of it
a corpor spy us some or all of the follow open sourc of inform
1 public record regulatori civil crimin
2 annual report
3 telephon directori intern and extern
4 analyst report
5 new account
6 magazin articl
7 construct balanc sheet
8 refer book
9 biograph sourc
10 visual sight and surveil
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1820 2011 fraud examin manual
11 electron databas and cdrom
12 internetweb
all of these materi blend togeth to develop actual action intellig in the
altern thei act as a springboard for gain addit data the question is if all thi
data is out there by default what can a compani do about it
certainli a compani can educ it employe to be care about what thei sai in public
put into print or place on the internet secur train mai also teach them to recogn
pretext telephon call design to obtain insid inform it mai also be benefici to
train employe on how spi us open sourc to gather competit intellig on a
busi employe can be taught not to divulg proprietari data and to think befor thei
speak
the realiti howev is that compani must oper in an open societi not a polic state
the free exchang of idea and inform will be absolut essenti to 21st centuri
commerc the first step in protect sensit corpor inform is to realiz that a
secur manag a secur investig or an intern auditor cannot protect everyth in
the word of john keegan the note militari historian to defend everyth is to
defend noth
a secur profession must identifi the kei piec of intellectu properti belong to the
compani those item whose compromis could caus grave harm to the busi requir
utmost protect know the tool and path in the open sourc sector a spy could us to
cut a swath to thi critic data will be essenti if the secur profession is to effect
protect it from a secur perspect an investig should try to exploit the avail
open sourc himself to see if an avenu of attack can be complet if so the secur
profession can institut countermeasur befor a loss occur
if an inform loss doe occur a secur investig or auditor can attempt to
reconstruct a trail back to a possibl spy with a sound knowledg of open sourc techniqu
favorit target
some of the favorit target of intellig gather includ research and develop
market manufactur and product and human resourc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1821
research and develop
on would think that research and develop rd would be the most heavili guard
depart in a compani but access to rd inform is surprisingli easi rd
personnel ar almost alwai in the flow of inform the open exchang of inform
is part of the natur of their job thei particip in confer attend trade show and
work with academ institut howev at each of these function thei leav themselv
open for intellig spi to listen mingl and ask question
research who publish their find in industri journal mai inadvert includ detail
of a project on which thei mai be work thi is particularli true in the case of academ
profession who mai be hire by a compani to perform research or conduct a studi more
than on compani ha been surpris to learn that the result of a supposedli confidenti
studi were publish in an academ journal if an academician is hire to conduct research
make sure that he understand that the result ar to be kept confidenti also make sure
that the us of teach assist or graduat student is kept to a minimum and that those
individu understand the confidenti requir
market
insight into a compani market plan is a valuabl gift to a competitor be careless
with vital inform such as test market result promot strategi and plan
introduct date can be disastr
manufactur and product
product manag ar often good sourc of inform also almost anyon answer
the phone on the plant floor can unwittingli provid valuabl inform to a crafti caller
from a competitor
human resourc
intellig profession often pai close attent to help want ad job post and job
announc more omin thei mai us thi inform to arrang a job interview
to get inform about the firm and what the job will entail
although the depart list abov ar some of the favor target of inform
thiev other personnel in an organ can provid enorm amount of us
inform for instanc salespeopl like to talk and ar an excel sourc of inform
on price product innov and market program purchas agent ar help in
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1822 2011 fraud examin manual
divulg supplier inform about what is sell and the cost of raw materi and
servic
how inform is lost
inform thiev util a wide varieti of methodssom legal some notto gain access
to an organ busi secret there ar seven common wai for inform to fall
into the wrong hand thei ar
accid
poor inform secur procedur
recruit spi
decept techniqu
physic penetr of the compani
surveil
comput system penetr
accid
accident loss of inform ar fairli common and occur in a number of wai
public such as newslett or report to sharehold that ar print by a compani
can inadvert provid valuabl inform to it competitor also speech or paper
that ar present at confer ar a danger point organ should implement a
system of review wherebi technic andor secur staff review in advanc all work up for
public or present anoth common sourc of accident leak is the press
execut eager to brag about their compani often reveal more than thei should about
research new product sale level and so on
a compani websit mai also be a sourc of accident leak corpor spi frequent
visit the websit of their target to gather inform that these compani have
unknowingli assembl for them inform such as employe telephon and email
directori financi inform biograph data on kei employe product featur and
releas date detail on research and develop and job post can all be found on
mani corpor websit in some case thi inform give an inform thief direct
access to compani secret in other instanc it help the spy build a profil of hi target that
will be the basi of an intellig campaign busi should pai attent to the
inform that is place on their websit and in other market materi as a gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1823
rule of thumb anyth that doe not forward the market mission of an organ
should be remov
poor inform secur procedur
compani that do not have a system in place for protect and dispos of confidenti
inform leav themselv wide open to attack by corpor spi an inform thief
will gener attack on or more of the follow area manual system hardcopi
document computerbas system electron file or personnel peopl emploi by a
compani or associ of the busi below ar a number of techniqu that compani
should implement to protect manual and electron inform
onsit materi that ar target
spi attempt to gather manual system inform by gain surreptiti access to a
target premis common method includ pose as a temporari employe as a vendor
or as a visitor on a plant tour materi that these spi gener target includ the
follow
archiv financi sale data market
in print form
store on comput media
draft document formal document and intern correspond ly on desk
scrap paper in wastepap basket and by copi machin
minut of meet
legal and regulatori file
comput printout
travel document and receipt
patent document
pend lawsuit
paper pertain to merger and acquisit
licens and franchis agreement
special manag report
audit of internet access
bill for databas access
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1824 2011 fraud examin manual
archiv
archiv provid a view of the target perform over time thei offer an excel
sourc for trend analysi even if a visitor on a plant tour is not abl to handl document
he can note their locat and avail for a later penetr
draft document
draft document intern correspond and result formal document mai reveal the
evolut of product design and market plan within a compani
scrap paper
paper thrown awai often contain valuabl inform about preliminari plan and report
hacker dumpster dive for thi sort of inform all the time often in the form of
manual technic specif and instruct these discard document can provid a
road map to penetr comput system thei can also provid insight into evolv
product or busi plan of a target
minut of meet
record of highlevel meet can provid kei insight on corpor strategi invest
polici product develop plan market plan and other crucial inform about a
businesss direct thei can also help the spy identifi kei employe possibl even those
who ar unhappi with the current direct of their own compani or career and who
therefor might be potenti recruit as spi
legal document and regulatori file
legal document rang from trade secret to pe nding litig to summari of regulatori
problem the compani face pend lawsuit often detail problem with the compani
product servic or oper
paper pertain to merger and acquisit have obviou commerci valu the same
goe for licens and franchis agreement special manag report document myriad
challeng the target face for exampl a report mai examin what is wrong with the
compani inventori control system or that the base of part supplier is inadequ
audit of internet access and bill for databas access
audit report on internet access usual from a proxi server log can tell a spy what topic
and site a compani research and which employe ar do it bill for databas
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1825
access of servic like db dialog or lexisn exi reveal compani the target is check
out and do busi with plu topic theyr investig
in addit these audit report often reveal if employe ar steal comput resourc for
their own person end undetect activ over a period of time indic a lack of secur
oversight these employe mai be candid for recruit as insid spi
guard manual system
manual system ar all humanread file and document these includ commonli
overlook item like rolodex and calendar attack on these system rang from pilfer
trash to infiltr a compani in the guis of a clean crew or vendor to outright theft or
burglari reason measur to protect document includ the follow
1 place sensit document in high grade lock file cabinet it might also be
advis to lock sensit document in a safe when not in us and at the end of the dai
lock or safe should be abl to withstand a physic attack of at least on to two hour
2 us a shredder for sensit documentari wast in the altern organ
mai opt to have sensit trash dispos of by a bond wastedispos compani if so
the trash should be secur store until it is collect by that compani
3 receiv and send mail at a secur site option includ mail drop post offic box
or lock mailbox the kei is that the site remain secur
4 provid reason perimet secur for offic us an alarm system add secur
lock to door and window or emploi both
5 pai attent to secur auxiliari materi such as
calendar thei mai note kei event in a sensit matter
special intern telephon directori
notebook and expens log from sensit case
work in progress such as report note and graphic on sensit case
mail list all such list that have proprietari valu should have trap name
place on them as a safeguard a trap name is a fictiti on with an address
that the organ control if mail is ever deliv to the trap name it will be
appar that the list ha been compromis furthermor the natur of the mail
will probabl indic who bought the list and mai help the victim determin where
the secur breach occur
index card and rolodex if thei contain sensit inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1826 2011 fraud examin manual
blackboard as well as diagram and chart on easel pad if thei cannot be easili
lock up take a polaroid photo of them and then eras the origin secur these
photograph
computerpap carbon and write tablet that have impress from note on
sensit topic shred them everi dai
comput printout of sensit data keep them lock up and us a shredder to
dispos of them
organ concern about the possibl of corpor espionag should establish
procedur for classifi and mark sensit item and should have provis for their
shortterm and longterm storag as well as their dispos or destruct larg offic
should have a structur logout procedur for sensit file so it is alwai possibl to
determin who had what document as well as where and when thei had it
guard inform store in electron format
electron data present secur problem that do not exist with manual document a
small highdens 12 mb comput disk can hold the equival of more than two regular
size novel cd usb flash drive and other electron storag devic can hold even more
with a singl cd a spy can walk out of a build with thousand of sensit file tuck
into hi shirt pocket furthermor it is fairli quick and simpl to copi even larg file from a
hard drive to a cd or thumb drive employe seek to remov sensit data can even e
mail it to an extern address so that thei never have to physic carri secret inform
out of the premis
sinc cd flash drive and other electron storag devic have extrem portabl
organ must take rigid measur to protect them and prevent unauthor copi of
sensit file onto them the follow guidelin will help organ maintain control
over data store on electron media
write sensit data file to portabl disk back them up with anoth disk lock up
origin onsit and secur store backup offsit furthermor secur storag area
should blend into their surround as much as possibl in order to make the
inform thief job that much more difficult
label sensit magnet media thi should includ both an extern label and an
intern electron label design the file classif the label command in the
properti section of window can do thi
guard against accident erasur file should be set so that accident erasur
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1827
cannot occur thi will also prohibit a techniqu us by some corpor spi wherebi a
sensit disk is delet then the disk which appear to be blank is taken offsit onc
offsit the target file ar undelet
emploi password secur on sensit file mani word processor can place
password protect on file combin with other secur measur thi provid a
fairli good perimet of secur for file softwar that encrypt entir file can also be
purchas
have a consist backup procedur for all file backup sensit file onto disk
design and label for that purpos
do not leav disk contain sensit file unattend or unsecur in larg
offic requir author user of classifi disk to sign them in and out from a
design librarian
scan outgo disk to ensur thei have no delet but recover sensit file
if a disk doe contain such file reformat the disk and then write the nonsensit file
onto the disk
befor dispos of disk cut them up for damag disk contain highli
sensit file it mai be advis to us a degauss on the disk first a degauss
remov all data from the disk so it content cannot be retriev even by undelet
program
organ should also make sure that sensit file ar not kept on hard drive in
addit employe should be train to not leav comput unattend if thei have
sensit inform on them befor employe go to lunch or on break thei should be
requir to place their comput in a secur state
to prevent spi from find valuabl inform in the organ trash sensit
comput printout should be shred and mix with nonsensit shred document
befor dispos
access to sensit inform must be limit to a needtoknow basi organ
should maintain a system such as a supervis access log that enabl secur to track the
inform that each person ha handl if sensit inform is to be transmit over
a modem the file should be encrypt not just passwordprotect although employe
might appreci the conveni thei should not be allow to dial into compani
comput that contain sensit inform from their home ani system contain
sensit inform should be isol
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1828 2011 fraud examin manual
basic principl of spy
recruit spi
in order to obtain insid inform on a target compani a spy will frequent try to
recruit an exist employe of that compani to act as hi agent on the insid an employe
recruit to spy against hi employ is known as a mole the mole agre to betrai the trust
of hi employ by hand over confidenti inform that belong to hi organ
the three most common recruit method ar fals flag recruit recruit by
justif and trap
fals flag recruit
fals flag recruit is among the most common recruit ploi if a spy discov that a
subject ha strong social or polit feel he attempt to twist those feel into an
appeal to help the caus the spy convinc the recruit that provid inform will
help save the environment condit in the amazon will further the interest of the
recruit nativ countri or will provid some ot her worthwhil benefit of cours the actual
intellig product is us for corpor espionag not to help the caus but the recruit
doe not learn that until it too late
anoth method that can be us to gain inform from a recruit is romant or sexual
seduct thi is not as common as the us of social or polit caus as a justif for
misappropri compani secret but it doe happen the spy or an oper doe not
necessarili trade sexual favor for compani secret often all that is need is for an
oper of the opposit sex to show some interest in the subject
recruit by justif
if a spy understand basic psycholog he mai be abl to convinc a recruit that spy is not
amor or immor in hi circumst when recruit by justif the spy look for a
person who think of himself as a victim an employe who is bitter at have been pass
over for a promot for exampl provid an excel prospect for a recruit other typic
target includ employe who feel thei have been underpaid or unrecogn by their
employ and who harbor a great deal of resent becaus of it under the right
condit these employe mai agre with a spy that the time is ripe for them to look after
themselv
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1829
trap recruit
in order to trap an employe of the target so that he is essenti forc to spy on hi
compani the recruit spy will look for some sort of weak in the potenti recruit
common exampl includ excess gambl drug or alcohol abus social unaccept
sexual procliv past crimin convict and wild spend habit
onc a weak ha been identifi in on of the target employe the recruit spy will
do on of two thing if the recruit ha some sort of chemic depend or seriou
financi problem the recruit spy will typic financ the recruit weak to the extent
that the recruit becom depend on the spy favor if the recruit ha someth
embarrass in hi past such as a crimin record the spy will more like blackmail the
recruit to forc her to cooper in most situat the recruit start as a friend help
the target meet hi need but later turn to blackmail to keep the recruit in line
regardless of the method by which an employe is recruit onc that recruit ha stolen or
divulg a secret piec of inform the spy can easili keep that person in line and forc
them to continu spy if the recruit tri to back out the spy simpli threaten to turn the
recruit in to hi employ or the polic the threat of lose hi job or possibl crimin
prosecut is usual suffici to keep an otherwis hesit recruit on a tight leash
counterrecruit train
compromis a person credibl and integr requir a seri of move that ar
gener plai out over a fairli extend period of time the method spi us to turn an
employe can be veri complex and can occur in a multitud of situat no secur offic
can see far enough ahead to forestal everi potenti compromis it is therefor imper
to train employe to report ani suspect recruit effort made against them as earli as
possibl the import of thi statement cannot be overestim kei employe should
be made awar of the most common recruit techniqu which were describ abov
in particular thei should be train to be wari of peopl who
encourag and financ some vice of the employe
express a great deal of sympathi for a caus that is import to the employe
offer to help with a seriou financi problem
attempt to seduc the employe
attempt to blackmail the employe
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1830 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious some of these techniqu involv ve ry person matter that the typic employe
will not feel comfort discuss with their compani that is precis why spi us these
avenu to attack recruit no amount of train will convinc everi employe to bring their
dark secret out into the light but by make employe awar of the wai in which spi
oper an organ mai be abl to help it employe resist their initi overtur thi
sort of train prepar employe to recogn a recruit campaign befor it ha
advanc to the stage at which the employe can no longer back out
after recruit
onc on board the mole receiv train on gather intellig safe and product
thi is not mere an afterthought the success of the mission depend upon it recruit ar
taught what inform thei should target how to collect data safe how to follow secur
procedur how to plant bug and other techniqu that will help them effect extract
inform from the target
target inform
recruit ar typic instruct to provid a specif piec or categori of inform rather
than be allow to indiscrimin retriev whatev secret inform thei happen to
come in contact with the reason is that most recruit lack the technic expertis to identifi
truli import intellig data furthermor most recruit ar not sophist
intelligencegather so the more inform thei attempt to retriev the more like it is
that thei will be detect therefor the control the spy who recruit the mole and direct
her activ typic assign the recruit a narrowli defin inform goal if the mole
successfulli complet thi task her object might be expand to includ other item
method for safe collect data
in order to reduc the likelihood of an intellig campaign be compromis a spy will
gener provid the recruit with some train or instruct on how to safe collect
inform for instanc when a spy target sensit document she gener doe not
steal those document outright it is more effect to copi the document if possibl the
spy still get the inform she need and the victim doe not know that it secret have
been compromis if classifi document were to go miss thi could alert the victim to
the presenc of a spy and caus it to tighten it secur control
most spi do not try to remov comput media with sensit secur label from the site
instead thei copi file from label media onto plain unmark disk or small portabl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1831
drive that will not attract attent from secur personnel rather than carri sensit
inform off the premis thei might opt to email the file out to a neutral rel
anonym email address
on of a spy main goal is to keep a low profil there ar a number of red flag that
corpor secur might look for if espionag is suspect and an effect spy will try to
avoid exhibit ani of these characterist for exampl a person who consist show
up at work earli or stai late mai make peopl suspici particularli if that individu ha
not in the past work long hour while it mai seem like the best time to steal sensit
inform ar befor or after hour thi activ might actual tip off the victim
in gener recruit ar told not to stand out and to avoid be label as a problem
employe if an investig commenc as a result of ani secur leak the recruit want
to be far down the list of potenti suspect recruit ar also instruct to keep their mouth
shut obvious thei should not discuss their covert activ with anyon els final
recruit ar told to spend their extra incom from spy gradual and in a lowkei manner
the goal is to avoid attract attent
commun between the employe and the control
on of the major rule for an employeespi is that she should not make direct contact with
her control instead the spy and control will typic commun via a system of signal a
chalk mark in a public place an innocu email to a secur address an innoc note left
on a bulletin board graffiti on a wall or a mundan newspap ad when email is us to
transfer document it is usual sent to untrac address or emploi intermediari
known as cutout
when spi must make direct deliveri to their control thei leav document comput
media or film and tape at secur spy drop these drop site can be in park abandon
build behind vend machin or in other similar locat the onli requir ar
access cover secur and the imagin of the spy and hi contact prearrang
signal such as those describ abov ar us to let the control know that an item ha been
left at the site the control mai leav the spy compens at the same site
secur measur for the recruit
spi ar instruct to not leav incrimin evid at their home or at their compani
workspac the goal is to elimin ani evid trail that could lead back to them
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1832 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor thei do not want to give the target ani indic that it is actual be
infiltr
comput secur measur for a spy can be of particular import recruit ar gener
instruct not to save ani document even for a short time on a hard drive or extern
storag devic without encrypt for ad secur mani corpor spi doubleencrypt
everyth thei steal with two differ system the overrid goal is to leav no
incrimin evid of the intellig campaign and to avoid detect at all cost the
longer the spy can continu hi activ undetect the more damag he can do
plant bug
recruit ar taught where listen devic should be plant in order to gather need
inform and at the same time avoid detect bug ar usual place in meet
room offic of kei employe or other area conduc to the discuss of secret
inform equal import is the decis of where to deploi tape equip the spy
need to place the equip in a remot locat where tape can be safe retriev if
tape is done onsit the spy risk lose the tape if the listen devic is discov
final the spy must know when and how to servic hidden listen devic and how to
safe remov them when the surveil is finish
decept techniqu
in mani case spi ar abl to gather inform from employe of a target without
recruit those employe in the surveil campaign instead the spy trick the employe
into reveal confidenti inform typic scam includ us fake employ
interview pose as a corpor headhunt conduct bogu market research solicit
contract bid on fictiti project and social engin each of these scam is design
to get the employe to reveal sensit inform about hi compani busi
employ advertis
employ wantad ar a great wai for intellig thiev to get exist employe from
a target compani to turn over sensit inform the bogu ad offer great job
opportun to peopl with qualif that match those of a target kei personnel
the employe who answer the ad think thei ar appli for a real job thei expect a
technic interview on what thei do dure the bogu interview the spy will seek to obtain
as much inform as possibl about what the employe do the project thei work on
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1833
the equip thei util etc thi is a veri lowcost collect method if the spy meet
with the employe in a restaur for exampl he is onli out the cost of a meal and the cost
of place the advertis in a highli competit job market fake interview serv as a
power tool in corpor espionag
headhunt scam
in a variat on the fake employ ad scheme a spy call a kei employe of the target
while pose as a headhunt with a client who is interest in that employe the
headhunt ask for a rsum and inform about project on which the employe is
current work an indepth interview by the client can provid addit detail thi
method allow the spy to target kei employe more directli than simpli run fake
employ ad
market research scam
in a market research scam the spy contact compani by telephon pose as a
repres of a wellknown market research compani the spy us a phoni
questionnair design to obtain background data to assist in further penetr of the
compani the spy might in some case attempt to obtain direct intellig data dure the
telephon interview the spy frequent offer the employe a bogu reward of some kind in
return for respond to the questionnair these call tend to aim at lower level worker
who have oper knowledg of the busi but who ar not like to be as defens as
higher level manag
phoni contract bid
anoth indirect method for obtain intellig from human sourc is the call for phoni
bid for instanc a spy might send out an impressivelook request for propos rfp
packag on a construct or manufactur project the rfp state that certain oper
and financi data must be submit as part of the bid thi ruse work veri well when
assess the abil of a compani to manufactur a certain product the bigger the bait the
more inform the target compani is like to reveal the return address on the rfp is a
mail drop which insul the spy from detect the deadlin set forth in the phoni bid
requir help ensur that the spy get the inform he need by the date he need it
on advantag of the scam discuss abov is that the victim remain unawar that thei
have turn over sensit inform to a spy even after the leak ha sprung if there is no
followup over a job interview for exampl the applic simpli think he did not get the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1834 2011 fraud examin manual
job if there is no feedback on a bid propos the victim think it fail to get the bid in
gener no feedback is expect on market research other than receipt of the promis
gift
infiltr techniqu
a corpor spy mai choos to collect intellig inform himself rather than recruit an
employe of the target factor that weigh in thi decis includ a tight time schedul the
lack of avail recruit or expens constraint the spy might simpli have special
knowledg that make him the best on to do the job
pose as an employe or contract labor
penetr a compani can be veri simpl as indic earlier on common techniqu is to
obtain work as a secur offic or a member of the janitori crew for the victim
organ anyon who saw the movi wall street might rememb charli sheen
charact put on a janitor overal to ga in access to sensit inform at a rival
compani even if the hire compani doe a background check on all potenti employe
usual noth more than a cursori crimin histori search a good corpor spy will rare
have a seriou crimin record it is not like that a spy will be screen out dure a routin
hire process
secur profession often comment that the best spi ar peopl who have advanc
technic knowledg for exampl phd in electr engin or biotechnolog if a spy
need highli technic inform on a competitor he mai have to us a person with an
advanc technic background who know how to identifi andor access the sought after
materi
individu with highlevel technic skill and high secur privileg gener have to be
recruit from within a target organ howev in some intellig campaign a
spy will plant a person with advanc technic credenti in a target compani in a
profession capac that person gain access to the target proprietari inform and
funnel it out to the spy a person who penetr a compani in thi manner is known as a
sleeper an infiltr who work on a longterm basi with an accept cover sleeper
will be discuss in more detail later in thi section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1835
steal badg
steal or counterfeit employe badg is on fairli common infiltr method util
by corpor spi if badg ar in us at the target site the spy can gener fake a copi
us a desktop publish program contractor badg pattern can be view on worker
eat lunch at local restaur even if the badg have magnet strip the spy mai still be
abl to enter the plant at a highli travel entri point where a guard onli make a quick
visual inspect of secur badg as peopl enter the site allow anyon displai a
badg to enter even if the onli method of entri is by an electron badg scan a spy can
still piggyback in on anoth person badg if the spy displai a badg an employe of the
target can be talk into let him into the facil
steal badg is also an option at bar and nightclub women might leav their purs
and handbag ly about with secur badg protrud in open view men do the same
thing with jacket hung over bar stool a badg purloin on fridai night will probabl not
be miss until mondai onc a spy ha the badg he just past hi pictur on the front
and he readi to go more sophist techniqu includ have someon lift a badg
from an employe purs or jacket the card is pass on to a colleagu who run it through
a magnet card reader thi can be done quickli in the car in a park lot for exampl
the badg is then return to the employe befor anyon notic it is miss later the
magnet imag that wa scan from the stolen card is transfer onto blank id card
stock contain a magnet strip with the addit of an appropri pictur and print
the spy now ha a badg that will get him into the facil and no on know that secur
ha been compromis
mole and sleeper
if a client ha a veri longrang interest in monitor a compani he mai place a spy in that
compani as a perman employe thi employe known as a sleeper keep a low profil
and report to hi control on a regular basi about the oper of the compani thi kind
of spy especi if well school in tradecraft will be extrem difficult to detect with all
the electron spydrop avail through email the sleeper never even ha to risk exposur
by meet directli with hi control
on wai to help prevent the introduct of sleeper is to perform thorough background
check where permit by law on all applic thi mai help detect oper who have
pad their rsum to make sure thei get hire of cours a clever spy will make sure that
there is a convinc refer for everi piec of inform on an oper rsum
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1836 2011 fraud examin manual
a mole function in the same manner as a sleeper the differ between the two is that a
sleeper is a person who is deliber plant as an employe in a compani to extract
inform a mole by contrast is usual an exist employe of the target organ
who is somehow compromis agre to turn over her compani secret to the busi
intellig profession when recruit mole intellig specialist look for employe
who ar stabl enough in their profession and person life to function as spi on a long
term basi as discuss earlier there ar a number of wai to recruit a mole but the prime
motiv is usual greed
place where spi snoop
when spi do infiltr a compani premis thei rare have to break into file cabinet or
desk drawer to get the inform thei need due to lazi ignor or just poor
organiz skill employe often fail to lock up sensit document each night messi
desk ar the rule not the except messi desk ar easier for a spy to rifl through than
neatli organ workstat if document ar remov from a sloppi desktop thei mai
not be miss for quit some time
messi is not confin to document comput often have mound of disk cd and
other media ly unprotect around them note on the side of termin and screen or
in unlock desk drawer frequent broadcast password and user id to anyon who care
to look user manual ly about often have similar inform scribbl insid all thi
clutter is creat by employe who place conveni befor secur compani that do
not enforc clean desk polici and do not requir sensit materi to be lock up ar
ask for troubl employe should be train to report sign that their offic have been
search for exampl paper have been move disk seem to have been shuffl file ar
out of order even when no inform is actual miss
mailroom
the mailroom is on of the corpor spy favorit place to snoop a great deal of
inform can be obtain from the mailroom by make a simpl phone call the spy can
learn where to ship and receiv packag how the target intern bill system work
where to locat employe of the target compani and even the compani feder express
account number a spy can also walk into most mailroom and simpli by act like he is
suppos to be there walk awai with cost center account number telephon directori
copi of intern commun and in some case even correspond and packag
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1837
load dock
despit the fact that mani compani maintain video camera and secur guard patrol at
their load dock these can still be great place to gather intellig and to slip sensit
inform out the door the secur personnel at the load dock ar frequent
contract worker with minim train on how to spot a sophist infiltr
furthermor contract secur personnel mai not be familiar with manag and employe
from other depart a spy can sometim don a badg and a clipboard and move about
the load dock with impun unquest by the secur offic who assum he is
suppos to be there meanwhil the spy is copi down purchas order number address
label data and type of merchandis be ship and receiv
secur guard mai be train to prevent the remov of manual document or softwar
that ar label or colorcod as confidenti howev spi can easili chang label and
cover to a differ color secur offic gener do not have the train to look for
other indic of sensit materi that ar be remov
storag area
spi frequent target storag area for inform becaus thei ar gener low traffic
area thu the risk of be detect is minim if someon doe come into the area while
the spy is there he will have a cover stori handi for exampl he mai sai he is do
research or perform an audit a prop like a clipboard will usual make the
stori convinc
for manual document the spy will check
unlock file cabinet
unlock closet and storag room
area contain archiv microfich record and comput printout
offsit rent storag locker
for comput media he will be on the lookout for
unlock storag area for comput media such as disk tape and extern drive
unsecur media librari
for the open storag of critic equip part or raw materi the spy will note amount
type and transit inform found on the merchandis if the materi ar kept in a secur
area the spy will try to obtain the access code by observ an employe as he enter the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1838 2011 fraud examin manual
area it is also possibl to sprai entri keypad with an ultraviolet solut that remain
invis to the nake ey the user unknowingli wipe the solut off the kei that he
press when enter the code the spy can determin the kei the user punch by
view the keypad with a portabl ultraviolet lamp
hotel
hotel room ar remark easi to bug and to search whenev a kei corpor player
travel there is a chanc that spi will be listen at her heel by us transact
intellig spi determin which hotel an execut frequent onc that piec of
inform is determin the spy can set up surveil of the target room for exampl
spi frequent bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel room and plant
eavesdrop devic
know where an execut is stai also make it easier to set up fix surveil of the
come and go of visitor to the hotel room or meet room for exampl the spy
can spot the target vehicl and rig it with satellit track to follow hi movement dure
a busi trip
electron and visual surveil ar not the onli spy activ conduc to the hotel
environ if a spy can gain access to an execut room whether by briberi or simpli
by find the door left open by a maid he can copi sensit file from a laptop left in the
room there mai also be sensit document in the room that the spy can photograph
trash in the room wast paper basket is also a potenti sourc of inform
if sensit document ar be deliv by a servic such as up or feder express thei
can be intercept after thei ar deliv to the hotel but befor the target ha receiv
them the spy open the envelop and copi or photograph the content the document
ar then reseal in a new deliveri envelop the invoic is remov from the plastic holder
on the origin envelop and place in the new envelop the spy affix a ship label
which is easi to gener on a desktop program and no on suspect that the messag ha
been intercept
spi can view materi deliv in a convent paper envelop without even open it
there ar special solvent call mail inspector that can be sprai on the outsid of an
envelop that allow the spy to see through the envelop and view the content insid after a
few minut the solut dri and the envelop becom opaqu again with consider
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1839
less sophist the spy can simpli resort to steam open envelop and then reseal
them after she ha read their content it is gener not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel
employe in order to gain to access the target correspond the same is true of
employe of messag and deliveri servic
warn sign of infiltr
if a spy doe hi job properli it will be veri difficult to detect an infiltr gener
organ have a better chanc of prevent infiltr by establish appropri
secur measur such as accompani all vendor while onsit and requir secur
badg for access to sensit area detect can be difficult but there ar some sign that
organ can look for that might indic there is a spy in their midst
employe who ar most like to be recruit as spi ar those who exhibit some sort
of bitter or resent toward their employ be alert for abnorm activ by
employe who seem to feel that thei ar underappreci underutil or ar
treat unfairli
employe who express some sort of polit or moral opposit to an organ
oper mai be suscept to a fals flag recruit
employe who ar undergo a person financi problem frequent associ with
drug addict gambl addict high medic expens or some other person
crisi mai also be vulner to recruit
employe who suddenli undergo a major lifestyl chang bui luxuri item take
exot vacat etc with no appar increas in incom should be watch thi is a
common red flag of fraud scheme but mai also indic an employe who is be paid
for divulg trade secret
employe who frequent work late or come to work earli mai be try to get access
to confidenti materi thi behavior is particularli suspici when the employe in
question work unusu hour as compar to other in hi depart
in some case mole will actual discuss their covert activ with their cowork
employe should be train to report thi as well as other suspici behavior
employe who seem to spend a lot of time in area not necessari to their work
function particularli area where sensit materi ar store mai be attempt to
misappropri compani secret thi should be investig particularli if the employe
is found in these area after hour
similarli employe who attempt to access sensit comput file that ar either abov
their author level or outsid the scope of their work duti might warrant
investig organ should maintain an autom journal that record event
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1840 2011 fraud examin manual
such as attempt access of restrict file
if employe have sensit file save on their hard drive or disk thi mai be a sign
that thei ar misdirect that inform thi is especi true when the employe in
question is not work on or should not have access to the file in question if record
reveal that thi employe ha email the proprietari inform to an offsit locat
thi is anoth indic of inform theft
vendor should be escort at all time when on the organ premis ani time a
vendor is seen loiter unescort around file room offic mail room ship
dock comput media storag area or other sensit zone the incid should be
report as a secur violat and potenti intrus attempt the same is true for
janitori personnel secur guard trash collector and other nonemploye
spi mai come disguis as repairperson janitor deliverymen etc incid in
which servic technician show up without have been call mai indic an
attempt infiltr
employe report of lost secur badg access card password etc could be a sign
that a spy ha stolen these item in order to infiltr a site
obvious if file or comput disk that contain sensit inform ar miss thi
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropri of inform in gener spi will copi
rather than stealproprietari inform but sometim sensit document ar
actual pilfer
employe desk or offic that have been tamper with ar a common sign of
intrus report of stolen materi clearli point to an infiltr but more frequent
intrud will onli rifl through file desk or comput disk choos to copi
sensit inform rather than steal it employe should be train to report
incid where their offic or desk appear to have been mess up even when no
materi have been stolen
secur personnel should log report of person who try to enter a facil without
proper identif or author similarli attempt to piggyback into a facil by
follow a person with author could be a sign of an attempt intrus
report of trespass or other crimin activ near a secur facil mai also indic a
surveil campaign in particular instanc where stranger ar seen loiter around
the outsid of the facil or dig through trash bin could be sign of corpor
spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1841
countermeasur
while secur offic cannot turn their organ into impenetr fortress thei can
implement specif countermeasur to thwart a spy attempt at infiltr their compani
materi bear proprietari data should not be store in area visibl to the public if
no other option exist the organ should onli us unlett colorcod
contain as oppos to label a particular file drawer confidenti thi will make
it more difficult for spi to tell where sensit inform can be found
organ should ask about their bank confidenti polici and make sure the
bank doesnt permit teller to access inform on major account without a manag
permiss if the compani ha sensit financi account it should find a bank with
comput system that us mandatori access control such control prevent bank
employe without proper level of privileg from access larg account inform
on larg commerci account should be maintain on a needtoknow basi
secur should establish a procedur for track and lock up sensit data
clean personnel should be properli bond and identifi and their access to the
facil should be control
vendor should have verifi credenti and must be escort by a compani
repres dure their visit
ani proprietari list must be password protect and trap
other gener countermeasur includ educ employe to properli store sensit
data and to question the credenti of anyon visit the site employe should also be
instruct as to what inform thei mai disclos over the telephon
employe should sign nondisclosur agreement in addit the legal depart
should be consult about integr vendor and supplier nondisclosur agreement
into standard contract
transact intellig
just about ani mundan busi transact can offer a potenti inform payoff to a
spy frequent flyer mile document where an execut ha travel credit card receipt
record a trip itinerari and good or servic purchas even video purchas or rent at
a video store ar us for document a target employe tast and procliv ani
on piec of inform by itself ha minim valu properli compil howev thi
inform can provid an extens profil on a target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1842 2011 fraud examin manual
inform
the seriou corpor spy will develop a network of paid inform who can get thi
monitor intellig for him these inform come from a wide rang of busi
travel agent
airlin reserv personnel
major credit card compani
staff at major internet provid
employe at video music and other entertain outlet
staff of adult entertain provid that the target frequent
telephon compani employe with access to telephon record
employe of commerci databas provid such as dialog and db who have access
to transact record
while the purpos of these inform is not to act as regular spi thei will for a fee
provid transact intellig on a subject that transact inform can have a
critic impact it can tell a corpor spy about
a person vice
detail of busi travel
hotel where the target stai and where she is like to stai again in the futur thi can
be us for set up surveil
whom the target ha call
interest and hobbi anoth wai to edg into the target confid
compani or subject the target ha research
thi type of intellig is realli a hybrid of documentari sourc intellig combin
pure open sourc and grai sourc and humint an insid contact is need to obtain
the inform but onc the contact sell it to a corpor spy the spy can analyz it
without need of addit assist
monitor intellig is veri help in the collect of human intellig if a spy know
a subject hobbi she can see to it that she m eet the target at a restaur convent
etc strike up a convers or possibl a friendship a target employe in thi scenario
becom an unwit sourc of inform
the spy doe not necessarili have to direct these effort at an employe of the target
organ for instanc if the organ us a contractor to microfilm it record the
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1843
spy might attempt to compromis an employe of the contractor or penetr it secur
rather than attack the target organ directli
a spy can also becom hi own insid sourc of transact intellig for exampl if a
spy want to develop a telephon histori on a subject he can send the subject a free phone
card for 60 minut of call time there ar compani that will mail the phone card to
the subject and then track all their call for a small fee less than 5000 thi kind of servic
can be a power intelligencegath devic employe should be train to be wari of
thi kind of scam
decoi websit
the internet offer addit avenu for collect inform on tactic us by spi is
to set up a websit to collect rsum for particular technic specialti includ on the
websit is a questionnair that visitor ar instruct to fill out to aid in place you the
site can also requir visitor to regist for free research servic the inform that the
applic provid make it possibl to keep a log of the link that thei access
it is not difficult to creat a site that target will visit it is simpli a matter of do some
research on hot topic in a particular field the spy creat a site that ha the necessari
metatag for search engin to pick up the titl she fill the site with relev link and
build log softwar into the site to track the link that user access thi can creat a
profil of the user and help the spy determin what he is interest in the spy can even call
user as a followup the user is impress becaus someon from the site took an interest
in him and thi give the spy a natur leadin to pump the subject for inform
a decoi websit might also enabl the spy to gain access to the target comput system
for instanc peopl frequent us the same user id and password for a number of
differ applic becaus it is easier to rememb than have sever differ
password the spy websit might requir visitor to enter a user id and password for the
research servic or to view bogu job post thi inform is store by the websit
and later us to try to gain access to the target comput system decoi websit can also
be set up so that visitor unwittingli download virus or other malici softwar thi mai
not necessarili help a spy gain inform but it can help sabotag a compani comput
system
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1844 2011 fraud examin manual
tell good li
rather than infiltr a compani to extract need inform a spy might mislead
employe of the target so that thei ar induc to divulg sensit inform given the
natur of the data requir it mai be simpler and safer to develop a cover stori and simpli
coax the target employe into reveal inform rather than us an oper to steal
the necessari data thi approach can be a power on especi when the spy ha a
special knowledg or background for exampl if the spy ha train as an electron
engin approach peopl in the circuit design depart of a hightech compani would
have a natur flow or qualiti the kei to thi type of attack is for the spy to be abl to
mislead the target about hi intent in other word the spy ha to be abl to tell
good li
regardless of the spy background the lie that he tell must contain a larg measur of
truth li not built on a foundat of truth falter quickli under skeptic question he
must be familiar with the background of hi stori henc he ha to do hi homework in
advanc if he doe not have a firm knowledg of electron engin he ha to learn
enough about it to carri on a convers well enough to convinc other he know what
he is talk about thi doe not mean the spy ha to be abl to solv complex electr
engin equat he just need to know enough about the subject to keep a
convers go and to steer clear of area of which he is obvious ignor
suppos the spy is after specif on the design of a microprocessor he pose as a sale
engin in a field offic in thi posit he would not be expect to know all the detail of
microprocessor design nevertheless he ha a good pretext for contact someon who is
familiar with the design he could claim for exampl that he is under a time constraint from
a custom and he need some detail to help close a sale to give the call a greater air of
authent he can have the salesman he support on the line too he can also tie in
the call to current event drop the name of a custom who ha been written up in the
trade press in other word he creat an intern consist lie that the employe in the
design depart can accept and believ
if the spy ha to meet with the employe in person rather than over the phone he would
bring the necessari prop these includ
fake id
bogu busi card
product displai
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1845
associ she can call on the telephon dure the meet to back up hi stori
the import factor is to make the target comfort in advanc of the convers he
prepar by studi technic detail about the product and person detail about other
peopl in the compani or the industri these fact ar pepper into the convers with
the target the goal be to get the target to let hi guard down and divulg the sought after
inform
visual surveil against peopl
prerecruit surveil
in develop human sourc spi know that thei should never underestim the
import of do prerecruit surveil on target there ar a number of goal for
thi kind of surveil thei includ
to discov
who thei ar
where thei live
what thei do in their spare time
what thei want to keep secret
who their friend ar
who their enemi ar
to look for
car
home
recreat activ
level of incom and debt
the subject import to the organ
to uncov what thei throw in the trash for exampl
financi paper
medic problem
famili problem
to learn about their enemi such as
exlov
fire employe
polit oppon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1846 2011 fraud examin manual
competitor
peopl ow monei
to make contact with the target
by find out what he think about hi job famili or life in gener
by determin the degre to which the target will confid in other
brief file on the subject
beyond the fundament of do prerecruit surveil the corpor spy also must
master regular techniqu to monitor ongo oper these techniqu begin with a
brief file on the intend subject if a spy were to follow a kei execut for the compani
the follow would be essenti start detail
name of the subject
photo of the subject
detail descript
known associ
frequent hangout
routin activ and schedul
vehicl us with tag number
type of neighborhood where subject live
street or locat layout
move surveil
the spy ha to be flexibl and imagin in conduct a move surveil for exampl
place a reflect stripe on the back of the subject car make it more distinct at night
lai a cheap wristwatch under the rear tire of the subject car will establish when he
leav the broken face will stop the watch at the time thei depart if a subject goe into a
bar or restaur the spy know to order food or drink and pai for it immedi so that he
can blend in and to be readi to leav at a moment notic
fix surveil
fix surveil while it ha mani advantag over move surveil ha on great
vulner the base from which the surveil is conduct for exampl a van park
across the street from the subject might be spot by the target as well as neighbor and
curiou passersbi in order to camouflag a fix surveil campaign the spy must be
familiar with the surround and choos a cover that will blend in
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1847
email
email is frequent dens with data on compani problem personnel issu statu on
project travel plan and merger activ it is also the most vulner form of comput
inform the vulner aris from the fact that almost anyon in the compani ha
access to the servic liter everybodi fr om temp to the ceo ha an email address
thi wideopen access creat an immens exposur that is compound by the desir for
conveni employe in mani compani ar abl to check their email from home
direct access from offsit via modem can permit compromis of the email server
onc a penetr of an email server occur whether by hack through search engin or
by us a legitim account a spy is in posit to do great harm he can forg an email
address for hi account and send messag about the compani request inform
peopl will respond think he is from audit for exampl when he mai be just a temp
work in custom servic
an intern spy can arrang to intercept sensit email by insert email address into
intern mail list when proprietari or sensit inform is distribut for exampl
to the manag mail list the spy receiv a copi at either an intern or an extern
email site with an extern email address embed into a sensit mail list it is quit
possibl that an intern spy can monitor electron mail long after ceas to work for the
target compani
email secur program can detect unauthor address plant into list so longterm
implant ar not alwai an effect strategi howev when a spy know intens activ
is afoot for exampl on a merger or acquisit shortterm tap into email list can be
veri product
social engin
in a social engin scheme the inform thief manipul peopl into hand over
secret inform through us of trickeri persuas threat or cajoleri the social
engin usual though not alwai oper by phone or email in some case the social
engin obtain direct inform from her victim about a compani busi oper
contract custom list or so on in other case a hacker us social engin to obtain
password or otherwis gain access to a comput system social engin is thought to
plai at least some part in most comput system penetr
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1848 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar a wide varieti of social engin techniqu the onli common denomin
be that the spy attempt to extract confidenti inform from an employe of the
target compani through some form of trickeri or deceit some of the more common
scheme ar describ in the follow section
the neophyt
in on of the most common social engin scheme the spy call the help desk of a
target compani and claim to be a new employe on hi first dai at work the spy complain
that he ha not yet been given a password and so he ha been unabl to start hi comput
and begin work the help desk employe give the spy a password therebi enabl him
to enter the compani system typic the spy doe not call the help desk directli in thi
type of scheme instead he call anoth depart and ask to be transfer to the help
desk so the call appear to be intern
the power broker
in anoth common scheme the attack contact the help desk and claim to be a high
rank compani offici an influenti client or some other impos figur background
search of secur file govern file compani websit or annual report ar
us to choos the fake ident the spy will us the spy us hi fals credenti to bulli
the help desk into hand out password remoteaccess softwar or even some kei piec
of busi inform
the system administr
in thi scheme an inform thief contact a comput user in an organ and claim
to be an it employe of the compani he tell the user that a network problem ha been
identifi with the user comput the spy ask for the password the user log on with
so he can fix the problem most employe ar will to give their password out to a
system administr when request make thi techniqu veri effect in a similar
scheme the spy will pass out a memo on custom letterhead ask user to verifi their log
on inform for secur reason
fraudul survei
fake survei ar anoth common social engin scheme pose as survei taker either
in person or over the internet spi gather inform from peopl about their name
nicknam ag birth date name and birthdai of spous or children pet favorit
hobbi favorit song favorit movi and dozen of other person prefer and
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1849
attribut the theori is that most peopl choos a password that ha some level of person
import the spi take the respons from their survei and try them as password
when thei attempt to break into a system
fake prize
final fake gift certif or sweepstak can be us to get access to a person password
for instanc an employe of a target compani is sent an email gift certif from a fake
vendor the spy ha set up the employe might be told the gift certif is a prize or that it
wa purchas for them by a secret admir in ani event the employe onli ha to access
the vendor websit in order to select the me rchandis he want to bui with hi gift
certif of cours in order to make the purc hase he ha to log onto a special area of the
websit which requir a user id and password the spy in thi scheme is bet that the
employe will us the same user id and password that he us at work
revers social engin
revers social engin creat the impress in the target mind that the spy is
someon who can help them it is actual a form of fals flag recruit the scam can be
perpetr by telephon email or regular mail in a typic scheme the spy pose as a
repres of some softwar compani he send a messag to the target indic that a
softwar product product x that the target own ha a possibl defect the target is
instruct to call the softwar compani the spy with hi user id and password in order to
receiv the fix when the target call the spy obtain hi access code and then pronounc
that hi edit of the product is okai now the spy ha access to that softwar product for
instanc a sensit databas to us at will
counter social engin
there ar a number of secur measur organ can adopt to counteract social
engin scheme while a few technic solut mai help the major of control for
thi type of attack involv train employe to be awar of how social engin work
the data that spi will seek and the inform that employe ar allow to dissemin
help desk employe should be train to ask specif identifi question befor give
out ani inform over the phone the organ should clearli explain the minimum
identif requir that caller must meet befor inform can be distribut a
twofactor authent rule should be mandatori if a caller fail to identifi himself
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1850 2011 fraud examin manual
accord to the authent rule the person take the call should report thi incid to
the secur group as an unauthor intrus attempt
when inform is given out it should be harmless boilerpl inform password or
person identif number should never be distribut over the phone without
concret proof of the caller ident refer to kei administr technic and bill
contact for the corpor internet domain should also be as anonym as possibl if a
compani doe not list it domain administr by titl then a spy mai not know exactli
whom to imperson when he call the help desk techniqu alreadi discuss such as
properli dispos of confidenti trash will also help prevent dumpster diver from come
up with contact inform that thei can us to trick employe
employe awar is anoth kei to fight social engin employe mai be told
what inform to give out and what authent factor to requir but it is anoth
thing to get them to follow these procedur on of the most effect wai to promot
complianc with secur polici is to make peopl awar of threat and actual instanc of
social engin attack some organ maintain intern websit or distribut
employe newslett with stori about secur breach along with prevent tip and
inform
an even more effect awar method is to select test employe secur readi
for instanc secur personnel should call their own organ help desk to see what
inform thei can obtain without identifi themselv it is also a good idea to run the
system administr scam on employe six month after thei have start to see if thei
rememb not to give out their password to random mi call if employe give up
inform without follow procedur thei should get a stern warn about their
secur respons thi type of remind will be rememb far longer than a
train session
cloak and misdirect
while honesti is essenti in busi deal with associ and investor it cannot alwai
be a secur team primari strategi in so me circumst misdirect the oppon is
essenti rather than remain passiv behind the static defens of secur offic
perimet fenc lock and access control a secur manag mai need to creat an activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1851
counterattack program such a program ensur that inform thiev ar as misinform
as possibl a misinform oppon is a defeat on
intellig need
good intellig gather is a prelud to ani success counteroffens against industri
espionag agent if a manag doe not know the oppon and their method of attack
effect cloak and misdirect will not be possibl
an effect intelligencegath network need not emploi an armi of spi basic
intellig can be gather from a varieti of sourc which includ print media
commerci databas network with other secur manag exist staff within the
compani and regular secur survei of the busi thi type of ongo lowlevel
intellig program help identifi potenti and emerg secur problem increas the
activ dure period of heighten threat to the busi is not difficult becaus a
preliminari intellig system will alreadi be in place bring on addit personnel and
resourc will not be overwhelm
print media
print sourc should not consist of an unread mountain of journal on the manag desk it
is far more product to subscrib to just a few profession public that ar read and
index secur manag the nation asso ciation of legal investig the legal
investig and the journal of secur administr offer insight on the latest secur
and investig trend
local newspap can provid an overview of gener crimin activ relev to the
busi and area busi journal ar good sourc for account of industri espionag
the secur team should also read employ ad for phoni job interview scheme
databas search
comput databas ar an excel intellig resourc most secur manag do not
have the time to regularli read all the major nation newspap and busi or technic
magazin relev to their client compani howev a secur profession can go to the
public librari for a few hour onc a month and scan magazin databas like infotrac for
compani refer a more effici method is to subscrib to a clip servic which will
scan hundr of articl from a varieti of sourc each month and provid articl
contain ani keyword such as a compani or employe name that have been specifi
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1852 2011 fraud examin manual
manag mai want to explor the costbenef it tradeoff of bui a modem and pc for
their offic that provid immedi access to the grow number of onlin resourc
includ asisnet from the american societi for industri secur wwwasisonlineorg
and a host of new databas in scan such databas the secur manag can run
search on ani refer to the compani na me offic or product as well as on the
follow kei case topic
industri espionag
busi intellig
competitor intellig
the research should read all onlin abstract and save ani articl if further detail ar
requir a pictur will emerg of what is avail in the public domain about the compani
the secur team should then evalu how thi inform could work to an inform
thief advantag
more and more local newspap ar becom electron avail via the internet or
through librari the astut secur manag should us thi resourc to check for local
crimin trend locat mention of the compani and it offic and perform background
investig on secur risk
network
network with other secur profession should not be difficult local chapter of asi
fellow cfe investig organ and former law enforc offic societi
deserv full particip meet of technic societi that ar relev to the busi
mai also be worthwhil even though these meet mai not directli address secur
issu thei provid us intellig about the busi for exampl if a compani
manufactur chemic the secur manag could attend the state chemic societi
meet to learn what is be publicli discuss about her compani and the industri in
gener
exist staf
an organ employe ar often it most neglect intellig tool proper train of
all compani employe foster the passag of vital intellig to the secur manag or
investig for exampl secur offic can report patrol observ such as attempt
by outsid to search the compani trash bin sale staff can identifi incid when
stranger have tri to pump them for inform at a trade show technic personnel
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1853
might report overli friendli member of the opposit sex who ask too mani businessrel
question at the local water hole
commun with senior manag is also essenti if the develop of a new
product line creat new secur risk or problem the secur manag investig or
intern monitor need to know effort to protect a product prior to market releas requir
the coordin of variou compani depart
secur survei
frequent secur survei help reveal potenti weak and new threat to ani
organ thei offer insight on where and how attack might happen and if a compani
suspect that it ha alreadi been infiltr by a spy a secur survei can help determin
how that infiltr could have occur and help focu the investig on the most
probabl techniqu these survei provid the secur profession with a chanc to see
the busi through the ey of an inform thief a percept secur manag
analyz the compani busi in a creativ wai look through a spy ey for pathwai
to inform that might otherwis have been overlook if a manag wish to deceiv
potenti inform thiev secur survei can tell where the pick for a thief ar best
and where to leav the bait
test the perimet
a secur survei should begin at the perimet of the organ the secur
profession need to visual himself as a determin attack do the alarm and video
camera system deter from enter the premis without author how easi is it to
bypass the access control system can badg be obtain without much troubl through
decept or theft ar basic defens fenc lo ck barrier and secur patrol in place
and in good repair
penetr techniqu
the person perform the secur survei should us penetr techniqu at variou
time of the dai to determin when the compani ha the greatest degre of vulner ar
thei abl to easili walk into the plant on the third shift ar vendor allow to wander
about the facil unescort can a visitor or employe walk unchalleng out of the facil
past guard station carri sensit document comput disk or a portabl comput
ar clean personnel properli supervis when onsit
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1854 2011 fraud examin manual
check for unsecur work area
secur personnel should also studi the wai employe work area ar maintain ar
sensit document lock up at night ar the copi machin electron lock down
so a special access card is need to us them do sensit area such as research lab and
comput media librari have their own separ alarm system and access control ar
file cabinet lock at night doe secur do random patrol of the offic area and the
plant at night ar all person in sensit iv area challeng for proper credenti
pretext call
secur offic can determin their organ vulner to certain extern threat
by call their own employe at work it is import to determin what an outsid could
learn by make pretext call do employe accept what thei ar told over the phone at face
valu or do thei verifi to whom thei ar talk befor give out sensit inform
test proprietari list and directori
it is import to make sure that proprietari list ar trap audit of email list should be
period conduct to ensur that no on plant unauthor address ar intern
directori and telephon list distribut in a secur manner is sensit wast paper and
comput media shred and dispos of secur
secur staff awar and line of commun
the organ secur forc should have train in protect proprietari inform
if someth out of the ordinari happen do thei have a mean of commun those
incid to manag is an intellig collect strategi in place will patrol offic
lock up sensit document thei find unsecur and make out a report detail the secur
oversight do thei know how to check for spy drop ar thei taught to observ suspici
activ such as an employe who alwai work late
employe secur train
it should be the goal of everi corpor secur offic to make sure that employe ar
awar of the import of secur and ar train to protect sensit inform what
kind of proprietari inform safeguard do employe learn how regularli do thei
receiv train ar thei encourag to report suspici activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1855
multipl layer of secur
there should be multipl layer of secur protect the most sensit inform the
layer should becom progress harder to penetr as on get closer to the most
sensit inform doe the organ have more than on layer of protect for it
inform and is each layer effect or is perimet secur the onli real impedi if
multipl layer exist do thei offer real impedi to spi or ar thei minor hurdl
cloak oper
with good intellig to identifi probabl channel for inform thiev a secur
manag can commenc the cloak of sensit oper fluctuat in traffic offer
industri spi the best indirect insight into a busi chang in the rate deliveri
shipment emiss and the type and amount of trash can reveal a great deal
the cost to mask these fluctuat mai be signific at time appropri guidanc from
senior manag must be a factor in comput the costbenefit tradeoff if the risk to a
product line outweigh the secur cost the secur staff should begin a cloak program
trash and wast dispos
trash and wast dispos ar excel place to start ad a consist amount of
shred nonsensit paper to sensit document wast greatli diminish the chanc of
traffic analysi nondocumentari wast should be secur in a lock hold area from
there it can be sort into uniform shipment modul befor releas to the wast dispos
vendor when the content of wast shipment ar fairli uniform deciph plant
oper from them becom much more difficult
deliveri and shipment
deliveri and shipment should be made on as uniform a schedul as possibl ideal
organ should avoid schedul major deliveri just befor a product manufactur
run thi is just the sort of tipoff corpor spi ar look for maintain adequ
inventori level can go a long wai toward elimin thi problem
if the manufactur process dictat tight part deliveri schedul the us of a common
carrier will at least mask the ident of the supplier to extern surveil util a mix
of common carrier and compani truck help cloak shipment compani driver should be
train to vari their schedul and deliveri rout thei should also be instruct to report
ani suspicion of intellig gather oper
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1856 2011 fraud examin manual
hour of oper and power consumpt
dure highli sensit manufactur test or research oper the hour of
oper and level of power consumpt should be kept as uniform as possibl light
can be left on continu and some kind of aroundtheclock activ can be maintain to
mask sensit oper
emiss
if the heighten activ dure a crisi period will result in addit smoke or steam
emiss the chang should be made as gradual as possibl the kei is to avoid creat
an unusu pattern of activ manag should eas the compani into ani critic period
of oper to avoid draw the attent of the outsid world similarli it should eas
out of the critic period when it is over
food deliveri
if signific number of employe need to work unusu hour in a crisi period the
compani should provid food servic for them from the compani cafeteria increas
food deliveri to the site can indic that someth out of the ordinari is go on
comput eman
if increas comput us creat unusu traffic in eman the compani can start
mask it earli with a buildup of nonsensit process in addit appropri
shield will cut down on eman whenev feasibl
travel plan
travel by kei execut and technic staff offer us intellig inform to a spy
dure period of intens financi activ such as a possibl acquisit or merger meet
can be schedul at neutral locat with short notic to ani outsid parti such as hotel
travel agent and rental car agenc
us the name of lowprofil employe or busi when book room and travel
arrang group travel by kei execut should be minim and the compani should
be sure to stagger the arriv and departur of senior manag at the neutral site execut
should be brief not to discuss sensit matter in their hotel room or on the telephon
in those room when feasibl secur should be present in the execut room when the
execut is out if not feasibl the execut should be train not to leav sensit
inform unattend in their room
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1857
technic staff member travel to research center or facil for factfind purpos
should mix in some nonsensit stop on their itinerari the addit destin will
confus onlook in case of possibl surveil stop at technic or research librari to
do some nonsensit person research can leav a spy unsur about which facil on the
trip wa actual import
misdirect
attempt to compromis employe or inform control demand an immedi
respons the question is whether to simpli shore up secur or us the situat to
misdirect the opposit misdirect involv feed inform thiev fals fact in
order to neutral their intellig effort
care guidanc from senior manag will be necessari if misdirect is determin to
be the best wai to protect the organ the fals fact that ar releas must not come
back to hurt the compani it offic it stockhold or it investor
assum that a misdirect polici is approv and carefulli craft it might work as
follow suppos secur ha detect an employ advertis that appear design
to lure technic staff to phoni interview so thei can be pump for inform secur
can go on the offens to counter thi threat by send technic staff member with
busi intellig train as decoi their goal is to give an impress technic
interview that send the oppon follow dead end lead at the same time the decoi is
abl to gather intellig on what the industri spi ar after thi type of inform
strengthen defens at the target compani
at trade fair convent and technic meet employe should have a prepar stori
to tell industri spi when confront with camouflag question about an industri
process employe can relat inform that sound convinc but that actual lead the
opposit astrai again such misinform must be suffici technic in natur so it
gener releas to the public would not damag the compani
spot fals suitor
a tactic sometim util by busi intellig profession is to initi fals
negoti for the purchas of servic product line or portion of the target compani
dure the cours of the negoti the spy attempt to gain valuabl inform about
the target it cost structur product schedul manufactur process etc other
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1858 2011 fraud examin manual
similar tactic that have alreadi been discuss includ spi pose as headhunt
conduct fals employ interview to gather inform and pose as a potenti
custom through the us of bogu request for propos
manag and employe should be train to spot these scheme fals inquiri by
purchas can be termin quickli if organ requir interest parti to
demonstr financi qualif befor commenc with ani highlevel negoti
financi statement of the suitor should be verifi similarli befor repli to ani rfp it
goe without sai that an organ should verifi the exist and interest of the
compani seek propos thi can be easili accomplish by simpli look up the
compani in the phone book or travel to it physic address to verifi that the compani
exist a search of state and counti record can also be conduct to determin if the
compani is legal regist anoth simpl techniqu is to contact other in the relev
industri to see if thei have heard of the suitor compani in case where a spy is pose as a
repres of an exist compani a phone call to thi compani to verifi the
inform in the rfp will help ensur that the request is legitim if evid suggest
that the parti or compani is a fals front secur can again take the opportun to provid
mislead inform to the potenti inform thiev
if employe ar approach by compani interest in hire them similar step should be
taken to ensur that these suitor ar not actual corpor spi fish for inform
employe should be train to report suspici offer by outsid of cours it is
unrealist to expect employe to report everi job offer thei receiv or everi employ
interview thei take what organ can do is train their employeesparticularli those in
possess of kei informationto be wari of the decept tactic spi us it is a good
idea to explain to kei personnel how these scheme ar gener initi and what
inform the spy will be try to obtain hopefulli thi will help employe spot phoni
suitor and report them befor ani meet or bogu interview ar conduct in the
altern employe mai at least be wari of suspici question dure bogu interview
and know enough not to divulg sensit inform
in addit to train kei employe to spot decept techniqu it mai be advantag
to train these employe in some of the simpl method thei can us to determin if a suitor
is legitim such as verifi it phone number or address contact other in the
industri or simpli call the compani number in the phone book if on is list to
verifi the time of an interview these ar step that employe can take without have to
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1859
tell their employ about outsid job offer and which might uncov a corpor espionag
campaign
vendor and supplier
secondari interview of supplier and vendor by corpor spi pose a problem a
compani rare ha direct control over what it supplier and vendor tell third parti so
supplier and vendor should be given inform on a needtoknow basi onli
proper train of purchas agent is also help supplier of highli critic compon
or servic need to be signatori to nondisclosur agreement if intellig reveal a
supplier to be a major leak the shortterm answer mai be send misinform through
that supplier the longterm solut would be termin legal action or both
technic articl and public
articl publish by technic staff can creat cavern hole in an inform secur
program staff mai unintention leak sensit inform as part of an innoc
academ exchang the same is true for public speak engag a polici of pre
public review by secur personnel and technic manag is an absolut must
while prepubl review of articl and speech ar certainli appropri
organ should not us technic articl and speech as a method for dissemin
misinform there ar other mean for conduct a counterespionag campaign that
trammel less on issu such as freedom of express the right to academ inquiri and the
right to be fairli inform
consult
consult can be a sourc of leak and their access to confidenti or sensit inform
should therefor be kept on a needtoknow statu their activ should be
compartment as much as possibl as with vendor and supplier consult can be
fed misinform if thei ar suspect of leak data to a competitor
if highli sensit inform must be discuss with a consult it mai be advis to
place the discuss in a context that limit the consult knowledg of insid
inform for exampl an expert can tell you what the melt point of a semiconductor
materi is but thei do not necessarili need to know why you need to know that
inform obvious the need to pro tect inform must be weigh against the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1860 2011 fraud examin manual
busi need of consult to have access to inform and a free flow of idea in order
to be abl to perform their work effect
deal with employe who ar leav
technic employe who give notic that thei ar leav their job while work on highli
sensit project should be transfer to nonsensit project until their termin date
all employe as well as vendor contractor consult temporari help etc should be
requir to sign nondisclosur agreement at the time of their hire when employe ar
leav an organ thei should be remind of their oblig to protect the
organ secret even after their employ end it is a good idea to have employe
sign a statement at their exit interview in which thei affirm that thei understand and will
compli with the term of the nondisclosur agreement thei have sign
if reliabl intellig reveal that an employe intend to sell the organ proprietari
inform place mislead inform in hi hand mai dilut some of the impact
plant technic gossip in the compani lunchroom for exampl mai be an effect
method for misinform an employe
hacker
if hacker or inform thiev penetr the comput system secur should give them
someth to munch on the idea is to place worthless highli technic sound file on
the compani system if someon sign on from an offsit locat and start to download
on of these file secur is notifi and an investig begin
the same tactic appli to pc sensit data should be place on disk and lock in a safe
when not in us bogu file contain misinform can be left on the hard drive for
pry ey if a secur manag realli want spi to take the bait she can add password
protect to the system to protect the bogu file the fact that the file ar protect help
convinc potenti thiev that thei contain valuabl inform the same idea work for a
comput sent out for repair place bogu data on the hard drive prevent servic
technician from steal and sell actual compani trade secret
anoth twist on the same theme is to place document and comput auxiliari item
contain bogu data in the trash auxiliari item includ old disk and cd old magnet
tape us comput paper and other media thi techniqu is an excel method for
manag inform thiev who like to go dumpster dive
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1861
if an employe is suspect of steal comput file that individu should be assign a
comput with a honei pot of bogu technic inform if the inform show up in
the public sector secur will know who is leak the inform
technic surveil
the popular imag of the spy at least as portrai on televis and in the movi is veri
often associ with all sort of hightech gadget everyth from miniatur camera to
exot listen devic to radio wristwatch and telephon hidden in shoe obvious
mani of these devic ar fanci and while thei mai provid interest entertain
thei ar far remov from the real world of corpor espionag
corpor spi do howev emploi variou form of technolog surveil equip
the tool vari accord to the need of the job at hand in gener corpor spi onli
resort to us hightech equip when simpler mean ar not avail to accomplish the
task in some case a miniatur camera might be call for to copi sensit document but
not when a nearbi copi machin can be us to achiev the same result in other instanc a
wiretap mai be need but onli when there is no other mean to monitor a subject
commun sometim satellit track of motor vehicl becom necessari but not
when simpl visual surveil will tell the spy where the subject ha travel in other
word corpor spi that know what thei ar do do not emploi technolog for the sake
of us fanci gadget
when spi do resort to the us of technic surveil equip it is usual to gather
nondocumentari evid or inform that cannot be found through open sourc or in
the target file the method that spi emploi to gather nondocumentari inform
includ 1 take photograph 2 conduct surveil and visual sight 3 listen
to convers 4 monitor comput and comput commun 5 analyz
traffic at a plant and 6 monitor eman from comput and telecommun
equip
nondocumentari inform ha certain advantag it captur chang over time
photograph taken at differ time or process as thei occur videotap electron
surveil can provid the spy with inform that would take mani hour of
documentari analysi to acquir aerial photographi provid a broad perspect on the
manufactur physic plant that is not ordinarili possibl with document alon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1862 2011 fraud examin manual
intercept comput commun and eman can provid an insid look at the
suppli purchas manufactur and market channel of a target that cannot be
replic by anoth sourc
the fact that a technic activ is possibl doe not mean that it is advis most type of
electron surveil carri potenti seriou repercuss in mani case thei ar clearli
illeg ani prudent spy will emploi technic intellig method with restraint onli
amateur will rush into a surveil oper by bug thi line and that junction box
these novic ignor the fact that the more on bug the greater the chanc of have the
surveil campaign discov in addit a corpor spy with ani season will realiz
that indiscrimin bug produc too much signal traffic to analyz
experienc corpor spi know what thei ar look for and devis carefulli protect
collect plan befor initi their surveil campaign thei know that the more time
spent plan the more like it is that their electron surveil will go undetect and
the greater the intellig yield will be the rule most bi profession us for protect
electron surveil includ the follow
if devic such as microphon or video camera ar to be left onsit those devic must
not be traceabl back to the spy or the client the mark on the equip must not
establish a trail on which to build an investig experienc spi us gener equip
avail from multipl sourc
wire tap and their associ devic must blend into their surround so noth appear
out of the ordinari to the layperson smart spi do not us contrapt that can easili be
identifi as bug
radio transmitt must not send signal in those part of the electromagnet spectrum that
ar in common commerci us profession avoid us cellular telephon band cb
channel or am or fm radio channel for covert transmiss thei also find out if the
target site us commerci twowai radio frequenc and avoid us those band
a compet spy doe not leav a hard wire connect between the wiretap and the place
where he conduct listen if someon locat the tap all that person would have to do is
trace the hard wire line to locat the spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1863
if the spy conduct offsit recept of comput eman and signal the recept
vehicl or site should have suffici camouflag or should be adequ disguis to avoid
ani notic or detect
a good spy never reveal anyth about an intellig campaign to anyon except her
client even after the job is finish
onc a job is finish and a report ha been written and deliv to the client a spy
destroi all documentari evid of the campaign
aerial photographi
though it origin lie in the militari sector aerial photographi ha emerg as a valuabl
tool in busi intellig googl earth a free onlin tool that enabl user to obtain an
aerial photo of properti by satellit ha made gather thi type of intellig quit easi
addition there ar privat aerial photographi firm that have fairli complet neg
for land in their servic area these firm also accept special assign to photograph
specif ground area on a schedul specifi by the client aerial photographi is us by
spi to gather inform on a competitor construct or expans product to
measur the size of it shipment or to determin the number of employe that the
compani ha work among other thing
bug and wiretap
hidden microphon wiretap and other form of electron surveil equip have
becom extrem common wai for intellig profession to keep tab on their
competit the spy ha two primari consider in a wiretap campaign where to
insert the surveil equip and which of the variou technolog to emploi
the insert point
in identifi the insert point the spy not onli ha to choos an area where proprietari
inform is like to be discuss or displai on comput screen but also where
background nois and electron interfer remain minim spi frequent choos area
with proxim to comput and telecommun equip carri proprietari data as
an insert point
spi mai also target area conduc to employe convers thi can includ ani place
insid or outsid the target compani where kei personnel gather and chat exampl
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1864 2011 fraud examin manual
includ smoke area recreat area such as bar loung and coffeehous employe
cafeteria relax area exercis room and meet room to target particular
oper such as inform servic spi might wire the offic of kei manag which
ar like to provid access to a larg portion of human inform flow
the technolog
in determin which technolog to emploi the spy must factor in environment
condit such as light if video surveil is emploi nois level and distanc from
the sourc other factor includ the risk of the sens devic be discov power
suppli problem and access to the devic for servic after instal
common electron eavesdrop devic includ
dropin telephon bug
carbon microphon
magnet or dynam microphon
electret microphon
spike microphon
caviti microphon
low power consumpt transmitt
infin transmitt
shotgun or parabol microphon
cellular telephon receiv
video camera and transmitt
satellit track of vehicl
it is not difficult at all for spi to purchas electron listen equip the internet for
exampl ha a number of site that advertis vast inventori of equip rang from
audio devic to miniatur video camera to satellit track system most of these site
urg their custom to us their merchandis onli in a legal appropri manner and
advertis the equip for purpos like check for intrud or ensur on own
privaci in truth howev these devic can and ar us by corpor spi to pilfer the
proprietari secret of their target
some of the more common form of surveil equip ar discuss in the follow
section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1865
satellit track system
in most satellit track system a small transmitt is surreptiti attach to the
subject vehicl common hide area includ the trunk insid fender or under the rear
bumper the transmitt commun with global posit satellit gp and convert
the coordin of the vehicl onto a map the spy onli need access to the internet and a
password to enter a special privat home page where he can view map that show the
vehicl locat and path these system ar capabl of gener event list and plaintext
histori of where the vehicl ha travel a variat on thi track design is that in some
satellit track softwar the system creat a trail of electron breadcrumb on the map
displai the map can be a power tool in track the movement of execut and kei
compani employe
dropin telephon bug
spi frequent us dropin telephon bug which have the advantag of blend in with
everydai exist telephon equip dropin bug ar simpli insert into the handset
devic on a normal telephon the target conv ersat ar transmit to a remot
receiv where thei ar record
dropin bug ar rare detect becaus most peopl never bother to unscrew the plastic
cover on the handset and perform a detail check of the intern compon thu a
dropin telephon bug offer minim risk of exposur to the spy when a spy ha access to
the physic premis of a target and want to be abl to listen to convers on a
particular telephon line thi devic is usual the chosen method of surveil
carbon microphon
carbon microphon while larger than most spy audio devic provid good pickup if
properli hidden and locat thei offer excel coverag of fix locat smoke room
employe loung and other gather spot as with other form of listen equip
these microphon ar usual equip with a transmitt that relai intercept
convers offsit to a record thi is much safer from the spy perspect than
maintain a record onsit with a remot transmitt even if the microphon is
detect the record materi cannot be locat or recov by the target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1866 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet and electret microphon
magnet or dynam microphon can be veri small thei ar us when a microphon
need to be close to the speaker and hidden insid someth small electret microphon
also provid good close rang coverag both type of microphon ar smaller than the
standard carbon microphon though thei tend to offer a lower rang of coverag
spike and caviti microphon
spike and caviti microphon work best when the spy ha access to an adjoin area and
need to penetr hi surveil into the next room for exampl if a spy ha free rang in
a util room next door or in an adjac hotel or motel room a spike microphon can be
insert through the adjoin wall to monitor convers in the target room thi type
of microphon is so small at it insert point that it is virtual undetect to the casual
observ
infin transmitt
infin transmitt ar a special kind of devic that can be activ from a remot locat
onc an infin transmitt ha been insert in a phone a spy can call that telephon from
anywher in the world and turn it into a listen devic unknown to the parti present
the telephon becom a hidden microphon
shotgun or parabol microphon
for listen to convers at a long distanc shotgun microphon parabol
microphon devic and laser audio detect equip can overhear even quiet
discuss provid background nois is not too high the spy ha to be mind of have
adequ cover to protect the listen post
wiretap
wiretap involv splice a listen or record devic into a wire such as a telephon
wire a pbx cabl an alarm system or a local area network cabl that is us for
commun by the target standard phone system in particular ar veri vulner to
wiretap tap ar usual place at the telephon box in the basement of build on
line outsid build or on telephon pole junction box near the target offic the
differ type of wiretap that can be util includ hardwir wiretap soft wiretap
record wiretap and transmit wiretap
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1867
warn sign of bug
covert eavesdrop mai be difficult to detect particularli becaus most peopl do not
know what sign to look for jame m atki nson of the granit island group on of the
lead technic surveil countermeasur firm in the us ha compil a list of 27
warn sign that might indic that an organ is the target of an electron
eavesdrop campaign1 those red flag ar list below
other seem to know your confidenti busi or trade secret thi is the most
common indic of a bug campaign
inform discuss in secret meet or contain in secret bid doe not remain
secret confidenti meet ar among the most popular target of corpor spi
peopl seem to know about your organ activ when thei should not
strang sound or volum chang ar detect on your phone line thi is a common
byproduct of wiretap or activ of a similar listen devic
you notic unusu static pop or scra tching on phone line thi is anoth
common sign of a wiretap or bug
you can hear sound come from your phone handset when it is hung up thi is
typic caus by a devic call a hook switch bypass which turn a telephon
receiv into an eavesdrop microphon and speaker and allow a spy to monitor
convers near the phone usual within 20 feet
your phone ring and nobodi is on the other end of the line but you hear a veri faint
tone or a highpitch squeal and beep thi is an indic of a slave devic or line
extend be us on your phone line thi is also a kei indic of a harmonica bug
or infin transmitt be us
you hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook by us an extern
amplifi
an offic radio suddenli develop strang interfer thi could be caus by
eavesdrop devic that us frequenc within or just outsid the fm radio band
these signal tend drift and will quiet fm radio in the vicin of the bug to check for
bug look for transmiss at the far end of the fm radio band and at ani quiet area
along the fm band if the radio begin to squeal slowli move it around the room until
the sound becom veri high pitch the radio should be set to the mono function
rather than stereo as thi will increas it level of sensit
a car radio suddenli start get weird keep in mind that the antenna us by a car
1 thi list is provid courtesi of jame m atkinson and the granit island group 127 eastern avenu
291 gloucest ma 01930 978 5463803 wwwtscmcom email jmatktscmcom
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1868 2011 fraud examin manual
mai be and often is exploit by an eavesdropp and that such usag might interfer
with radio transmiss
an offic televis suddenli develop interfer eavesdrop devic can tend to
interfer with televis recept
your offic appear to have been burglar but noth wa taken someon could
have enter the premis in order to plant a listen devic
electr wall plate cover outlet switch smoke alarm and light fixtur
appear to have been move slightli these ar among the most popular locat for
hide listen devic which requir that the plate be remov watch for slight
variat in the color or appear of the power outlet or light switch as these ar
often swamp out by an eavesdropp
a dimes discolor appear on an offic wall or ceil thi is a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal
on of your vendor give you an electron devic such as a desk radio alarm clock
cd player or small televis these gift frequent contain secret eavesdrop
devic
a small bump or deform ha appear on the baseboard by the floor thi is a
strong indic that someon mai have conceal covert wire or a microphon
imbed into the adhes that hold the mold to the floor
a smoke detector clock lamp or exit sign in your offic or home look slightli crook
ha a small hole in the surfac ha a quasi reflect surfac or otherwis appear to
have been tamper with these item ar also common place for conceal bug
certain item just appear in your offic without anyon know how thei got there
typic item to watch for and bewar of ar clock exit sign sprinkler head radio
pictur frame and lamp thei mai contain listen equip and could have been
place in your offic by a spy
drywal dust or debri is found on the floor next to a wall thi could be a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal nearbi
small piec of ceil tile or grit ar found on the floor or on a desk also a crack
chip or goug ceil tile sag ceil tile or ceil tile not properli set into
track mai be observ thi indic that a ceil tile ha been move possibl becaus
someon ha instal a technic surveil devic abov your ceil
phone compani truck and util worker seem to be spend a lot of time near your
home or offic these worker could actual be corpor spi in disguis
telephon cabl plumb or air condit repair peopl show up to work when no
on call them thi is a veri common method for an eavesdropp to plant a bug
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1869
servic or deliveri truck ar often park nearbi with nobodi in them these vehicl
mai be listen post for spi in particular look for vehicl that have ladder or pipe
rack on the roof have tint window and ar larg enough to conceal a person in
the back
your door lock suddenli do not feel right thei becom sticki or thei fail
altogeth thi is evid that the lock ha been pick manipul or bypass by
an intrud
furnitur appear to have been move slightli and no on know why eavesdrop
devic ar commonli hidden behind or insid furnitur
thing seem to have been rummag through but noth is miss thi could be a
sign that someon ha been look through your paper perhap even copi them
befor return them to your work area the most common rummag target ar
the back of desk drawer the bottom of file cabinet closet and dresser drawer
an eavesdropp send you a copi of your privat convers as simpl as it seem
thi is the strongest indic and solid proof of eavesdrop an eavesdropp will
sometim send a victim a copi of a privat convers thei intercept in an attempt
at blackmail or in an attempt to terror or just stalk the victim thi is commonli seen
in civil lawsuit crimin court case marit problem sharehold disput custodi
battl and other situat where on side ha a posit of weak and is
psycholog try to undermin their oppon
preliminari search procedur
if an organ suspect that wiretap ha occur there ar a number of preliminari
search procedur that the layperson can perform thi section is not design to make the
reader an expert at countersurveil techniqu profession who offer those servic
can easili be locat howev it is quit feasibl for an ordinari person to conduct a basic
search for wiretap equip when conduct an inspect for electron
surveil equip be mind of safeti concern never reach into electr box or
outlet unless you ar sure the power is off and do not grasp bare wire unless you know
thei ar not live
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1870 2011 fraud examin manual
know your devic
wiretap devic for the most part look like hobbyist electron circuit board the
major differ is that thei ar much smaller than the circuit board of the past satellit
track equip is usual hous in small metal box about the size of a paperback
book thei requir small antenna that have to face toward the sky
inspect telephon
if the mouthpiec or earpiec on telephon handset have screwoff plastic cover remov
them and make sure no transmitt or unusu look compon ar attach to the
microphon condens also examin the mark on the condens unit do thei match a
condens from a similar telephon kept in a secur area if the mark ar significantli
differ have them check by a repres from the telephon manufactur
if the cover on the handset is on solid piec of plastic look at the two screw that hold the
plastic plate on if the screw have scratch on them eg from a screwdriv remov the
screw and take the plate off examin the condens for sign of tamper or for
miniatur transmitt
examin the back or undersid of the telephon look for unusu compon tape or
held by a magnet to the back metal plate also look for unusu wire protrud from the
phone thi mean ani wire other than the regular plastic sheath cord that is found on
all telephon if these examin ar neg then the telephon is probabl secur
if you still suspect the presenc of a listen devic do not attempt to disassembl the main
part of the telephon you mai damag the unit instead look at the screw hold down
the main bodi of the phone to the metal plate if those screw show sign of tamper
have someon from the manufactur examin the unit
it is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephon attach to the wall
carefulli remov the cover and check for ani electron compon insid in a normal
wall box you should onli see wire and screw point where the wire ar ti togeth
extran compon could be electron listen devic if you ar not sure whether
the item you have identifi is actual a transmitt or microphon contact a qualifi
2 the granit island group a technic surveil countermeasur firm provid photograph of some
electron surveil equip on it websit wwwtscmcomwhatistscmhtml
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1871
countermeasur expert the phone compani or a repres from the phone
manufactur
interfac box
the interfac box is a grai box typic locat on the side of the build if a busi
oper in a multipl occup structur the interfac box mai be locat in a util closet
close to the compani offic in order to ex amin the interfac box unscrew the side of
the box that is design for custom access look insid with a flashlight all wire in the
box should look the same us the color red blue green yellow and black you might see
some stripe wire but that is fine there should also be a line come into the side of the
box from the telephon compani what you should be look for is a transmitt or some
form of unusu wire that doe not appear to come from the telephon compani and doe
not lead into your build or offic thi could indic a wiretap
abov the ceil
if an open space exist abov the ceil in your offic access that area and look around
with a flashlight be on the lookout for everyth from sophist transmitt to tape
record that ar crude hook into telephon line if listen devic have been place
in an attic or in a crawl space abov the ceil thei probabl have not been elabor
camouflag it should not be exceedingli difficult to spot surveil equip in these
area
it is a good idea to have the light turn on in the room below while you search overhead
if someon ha drill hole in the ceil to insert a microphon the light should shine
through the ceil and you will be abl to detect the hole surveil personnel frequent
drill multipl hole befor select just on as a listen spot or insert a miniatur video
camera
other place to search
us a flashlight to look through the grill panel cover all air condit duct for
transmitt or listen devic carefulli inspect all electr outlet by remov the cover
plate and look insid with a flashlight examin ani central util closet for unusu
wire and electron devic look for sign of debri on the floor under outlet or light
switch thi might indic that someon ha remov the wall plate to insert a listen
devic ani time duct outlet plate light fixtur or similar item have been search and
replac their orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1872 2011 fraud examin manual
marker by shine an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have
been remov thi techniqu make it much easier to determin if someon ha tamper
with those item sinc the last search
look under desk and tabl in all offic space for electron devic or wire that seem out
of place do not tear your offic apart while conduct your search feel your wai around
and explor with your hand look under and behind couch and sofa it is especi
import to close examin furnitur in area where peopl ar like to sit and chat the
tabl and credenza in meet room should be check on a regular basi
check ani televis set radio lamp telephon comput clock smoke detector or
sprinkler head in the room if ani area ar serv by cabl tv be sure to check out the
cabl line convert box line splitter and connector for anyth that seem out of place
ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov as unus wire
can be us for eavesdrop
comput
alwai check the back of comput for monitor devic tape to the back panel
examin all connect between the comput and the outsid world line to printer
network cabl line to peripher devic or line to monitor pai attent to ani
connector that have been place between the comput and it extern line these
connector mai look like thei perform a legitim function but if the extern line could
have been plug directli into the comput find out why the interfac wa insert and
who put it there
the area immedi around the comput should be check for unusu wire electron
box or devic ani closet or room dedic to hous network equip such as
hub router cabl rig or network monitor gear need close examin by a
qualifi network technician to make sure no alien electron devic ar present
video surveil
the role that video camera plai in the corpor espionag campaign ha sever
dimens microcamera place in a room of comput screen can focu on individu
screen and result in the tape of password login user manual text specif error
messag content of document and keyboard overlai dure mani hour of transact
camera can be us to monitor activ on receiv and ship dock plant
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1873
microcamera can track activ on product line or present in meet room thei
can also captur execut or kei employe at embarrass moment such
document can later be us for blackmail
video camera with a time and date stamp on the footag offer a mean of determin the
secur activ in the compani time of secur patrol access to special area like lab
the empti of secur wastebasket and other activ can all be track thi
inform can aid a spy in penetr restrict or sensit area
photograph camera
almost as ubiquit as the bug the miniatur camera plai a lead role in the canon of
spycraft mani a motion pictur ha shown the spy whether af ter militari or industri
secret bent over document quickli snap the shutter with the tini camera avail
todai industri spi can sneak out of a compani premis with numer secret tuck
awai in a purs or shirt pocket
minicamera
with the advent of copi machin in almost everi american busi the need to emploi
the minicamera to captur inform from document dramat declin becaus
mani sensit document ar store in electron format comput media such as disk
cd usb flash drive and other storag devic have also erod the need for film
camera some applic do howev still exist for the minicamera document such as
map schemat diagram and engin draw frequent cannot be easili copi due
to their size the minicamera is a viabl option for captur the inform on these item
conceal stationari camera with larg roll of film have larg been replac by video
camera film is difficult to replac at hidden sensit site it is also expens to process
videotap is cheap need no process and ca n be record offsit far from the video
cameratransmitt thu even if the target compani discov the hidden video camera
the footag will remain safe in the spy control
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1874 2011 fraud examin manual
infrar film
infrar film ha valu when surveil is done under veri low light or when the spy need
to examin damag or eras document even the content of burn document can be
detect under the right condit with infrar film
digit camera
as digit camera becom smaller in both cost and size thei mai becom a more
formid tool in the corpor spy arsen digit imag ar captur on a small disk
whose content can be load into a comput the imag can be enhanc and manipul
us variou softwar program therebi offer excel resolut the disk carri the
stolen imag can be carri off and on premis with littl chanc of detect
for ani good spy a good digit camera is the mainstai in hi surveil arsen even if
extens aerial photograph ar taken observ of the target site at ground level is
essenti from the ground view mani featur like sign letter on the side of vehicl
the configur of build and street licens plate and other import detail becom
visibl photograph of kei employe of the target can also be valuabl inform in mani
intellig campaign
to avoid attract attent the intellig specialist gener us telescop or reflect
lens to zoom in on detail from a safe distanc in build a visual file on a plant site a
spy will take ground level photograph from around the entir circumfer of the target
area he will even photograph crt and comput screen that ar visibl through window
to aid in analyz photograph at a later date the specialist will catalogu all photograph
as to
subject matter
datetim of dai
direct of shot
number in a sequenc of shot
import featur in shot
thi data can be store in a databas like microsoft access photograph themselv can
be incorpor into the databas by scan them into the comput from a flat glass
scanner or by load them from a digit camera photograph imag excerpt from
videotap surveil aerial photograph and relev diagram document imag or
draw can be also integr into on databas for extens analysi analyt
investig databas like i2 allow for the organ of visual data a databas gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1875
variou narr report chart diagram and chronolog the opportun for an
inform multipli effect ar tremend
cellular telephon
anyon who conduct a sensit or confidenti convers on a cellular telephon is
either highli naiv or plain foolish these transmiss ar transpar to the secret servic
of all govern ani amateur with a receiv can also pick up cellular commun
most corpor spi will as a matter of cours scan cellular frequenc around a target
plant thei will also focu in on cellular telephon call by execut and kei employe by
simpl physic surveil a spy can observ an execut pull out hi cellular telephon in
the car in a restaur or in the groceri store thi will alert the spy to begin monitor the
target cellular frequenc employe should alwai keep in mind that someon could be
listen to their convers sensit inform should not be convei by cellular
phone as with other surveil equip the tool necessari to monitor cellular
telephon convers ar easi to come by
monitor comput eman
digit comput process inform with a seri of 0s and 1s these two digit do not
translat to on and off state but rather to high and low current these current caus
pixel on a comput screen to fire produc high voltag puls that eman into the
surround environ comput eman form a detect and decod pattern a
detector or receiv known as a van eck unit can reproduc keyboard entri on a
comput screen even from a consider distanc
a van eck unit consist of a direct antenna logic circuit and two adjust oscil
on for the vertic and on for the horizont with proper adjust a van park
across the street equip with a van eck receiv can decod the eman from a
keyboard oper insid a neighbor build devic like cpu tape drive disk
drive and commun devic all gener electromagnet radiat which van eck
receiv can detect
to prevent competitor from monitor comput eman organ can shield
their comput equip and transmiss line a process known as tempest while thi
process is us extens in the militari and by certain defens contractor the cost
involv prevent mani privat sector busi from emploi tempest procedur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1876 2011 fraud examin manual
tape record
the best place for a spy to place a tape record is offsit far awai from the microphon a
transmitt locat with the microphon send a signal to an offsit receiv that is
connect to the tape record thi precaut ensur that a compromis of the
microphon will not result in captur of the tape record can also be hook up directli
to telephon in order to record tap phone convers
all that is necessari to creat a crude wireless phone tap is a capacitor to block the dc
voltag from the telephon line wire in seri with a small am or fm transmitt across
the telephon wire pair an am or fm radio plug ged into a tape record pick up the signal
by take the output from the radio audio ja ck a profession would not us thi kind of
tap but a secur investig ha to be on the lookout for the amateur spy too some
employe want to get insid inform to gain an advantag over their cowork
bug the bosss telephon is a good wai to do it
comput system penetr
in some case inform thiev will attempt to extract inform by penetr a
compani comput defens thi can be part of an organ intellig campaign or in
some case it is simpli a random attack by a hacker bent on mischief for more inform
on how outsid attempt to penetr comput system see the comput and internet
fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
investig an inform theft case
most corpor espionag case begin with the discoveri of the offens someth is
miss or inform is out in the public sector the critic first step is find out how
the sensit inform wa compromis k now how the data went out the door often
reveal who stole the secret for exampl if a trap list becom compromis the
organ will know the list ha been compromis becaus it receiv a mail from
the mail envelop and it content the organ will be abl to determin who bought
the list by check the compani intern record it will be possibl to determin who had
access to the list within the compani so simpli by know how the leak occur and that
someon bought the list two avenu of inquiri ar alreadi establish the compani that
mail the list should be contact and an intern investig of peopl who had an
opportun to compromis the list should be commenc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1877
the first step in ani corpor espionag investig is to determin the mean of the
compromis investig should attempt to rule out accident and procedur caus first
in respons to a compromis the secur investig or auditor will need to do a survei to
see if inadequ measur ar the caus factor onc the compani neglig is rule
out the investig can focu on potenti suspect
most investig should begin with the pe rson closest to the sensit inform and
then work outward for exampl if a market list were stolen it would make the most
sens to first look for suspect among the group that manag the list background
investig on these employe should be run check to see if ani of those employe
have risk factor that would make them like recruit for corpor spi risk factor
includ recent financi or lifestyl chang that appear out of the ordinari red flag that
particularli stand out ar employe who suddenli seem to spend a lot more monei or work
a lot of extra hour that do not seem particularli necessari given the employe job
if the member of the closest circl pass muster the investig move outward to
consid other employe vendor custom and visitor for exampl a secur offic
might examin visitor log to see who ha visit the market group recent gener
servic personnel like the clean crew the copier or comput repairperson or a deliveri
person who ha regular access to the area should also be consid suspect it is a good
idea to look for record or observ of suspici activ such as peopl come in at
unusu hour be in place not necessari for their work pump employe for
inform or access comput file
if the investig fail to develop ani lead on employe vendor or visitor then look to
decept techniqu reinterview employe in the affect area to find out if thei
receiv ani suspici telephon call email or redirect mail process at or near the
time of the loss also be sure to ask employe if anyon ha approach them for
inform at trade show or in social situat
if decept doe not appear to have been the avenu of attack the next consider
should be physic penetr of the site review surveil videotap of recent traffic in
and out of the affect area for intrud pretend to be employe again interview
employe mai uncov memori of person who appear suspici
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1878 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious an investig would also check intern record for ani incid of crimin
activ onsit at or near the time of the loss such activ could includ a burglari or theft
that appear unrel to inform secur at the time it could be a trespass charg
or disorderli conduct on compani properti do not overlook intellig or incid
report of secur personnel on activ such as peopl try to get into the trash
dumpster and loiter about the park lot conduct a secur survei at thi stage is
also a good idea it will help the investig detect weak in the organ physic
secur and mai help point out how an intrud could have enter the site
after exhaust all other option consid the possibl of surveil against the site if
sensit detail ar go out the door electron eavesdrop van eck monitor or
comput system penetr could be to blame the respons to electron eavesdrop
should be a physic inspect of the affect area and perhap the engag of a tscm
sweep as outlin later in thi section at the same time research all record regard work
order or vendor access to the affect area thi document mai help identifi who
plant the devic
program for safeguard proprietari inform spi
compani should develop a program for safeguard proprietari inform spi busi
should seek out a corpor inform offic cio to develop and manag an spi
program an altern is to hire a secur manag consult to develop a program
and then maintain it on a yearli basi in either case the cio should have inform
manag skill and be knowledg about trade secret protect
task forc
to coordin a companywid spi program a task forc should be assembl the task
forc should includ manag and staff from depart that deal with proprietari
inform such as research and develop and product the team should also
includ repres from corpor secur human resourc record manag data
process and legal
the process should begin by determin what inform should be protect the task
forc should identifi those area that give the compani it competit edg such as qualiti
of the product servic price manufactur technolog market and distribut on
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1879
wai of accomplish thi is to ask the team if you were our competitor what inform
would you like to know
onc these sensit area have been identifi the primari focu should be on the
inform secur procedur for each depart thei should identifi where
proprietari inform is kept and survei the risk if such inform is lost to
a competitor
employe awar
an effect program must educ employe about secur awar employe should
understand that their profession growth and wellb depend on the success of the
compani it should be made clear that the success of the compani is directli ti to the
protect of inform and data employe should be taught how to respond to
telephon inform request a procedur should be set out wherebi inform
request ar sent to public relat or some other depart
nondocumentari commun should also be protect employe need to know that
thei ar account for what thei sai whether it be over the phone or at a social gather
employe should never discuss confidenti busi inform at airport restaur or
ani place thei could be overheard thei should also be instruct about us a laptop
comput wherev there mai be a chanc it could be read in public by someon shoulder
surf
regular remind of the import of inform secur should be publish regularli
in compani newslett on bulletin board or in memo
nondisclosur agreement
all employe should sign a nondisclosur agreement everyon involv with the compani
should sign such an agreement includ subcontractor and their employe cleric staff
consult and temporari besid the legal valu a comprehens nondisclosur
agreement send a signal to employe that the compani ha a tough attitud toward
prevent leak it might also be necessari to have supplier and distributor sign
nondisclosur agreement although supplier and distributor have to receiv inform
about certain aspect of a busi employe deal with them should be made awar of the
potenti for misus of the inform and should be instruct to provid them with onli
the inform that is essenti for them to do their job
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1880 2011 fraud examin manual
document classif
document classif is also an import area in a protect plan work close with
each depart proprietari document should be classifi accord to the level of
secur that best meet the compani need s for instanc document mai be label
privat for personnel matter and move up to restrict for price or market
inform trade secret or highli sensit inform might be label author
access onli note and draft of document should also be safeguard or destroi when
the final document is complet
visitor
visitor access should be close monitor visitor should be requir to sign in and out in
a logbook and thei must be escort by their host at all time and should not be allow
into area where there might be sensit inform
offic
engin and execut offic should alwai be lock to discourag brows theft or
the plant of an eavesdrop devic kei to offic door should be kept secur
keep proprietari inform and comput disk in lock cabinet greatli reduc the
risk of theft
mainten worker
manag should design secur personnel or someon to monitor mainten work
done in area in which there might be sensit inform we have all seen scene in
movi where the hero or villain gain access to confidenti inform by walk into a
build or offic pose as a mainten worker
meet room
page system background music speaker and unus wire can be us for eav
drop ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov a
mirror and a light affix to a flexibl handl can be us to search for record and
transmit devic in air duct after the search when the duct grill ar replac their
orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet marker by shine
an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have been remov meet
room should be lock when not in us if blackboard or flip chart ar us thei should
not face the window or the blind should be close to prevent observ from telescop
or binocular
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1881
quiet room
a quiet room mai cost anywher from 15000 to 200000 but the cost mai be justifi
depend on the risk involv a quiet room is acoust shield and radiofrequ
shield the room can also be equip with intrus monitor sensor and closedcircuit
televis camera
commun equip
cellular or cordless telephon must not be us to discuss sensit busi matter these
devic ar radio transmitt and ar frequent monitor by both hobbyist and
profession inform broker
electron mail and voicemail
for knowledg hacker email and voicemail system ar easi target
confidenti inform should not be left on a voicemail system likewis it should never
be left on a home answer machin hotel often offer voicemail for their guest these
system requir no password to gain access to and should never be us for sensit
inform author michael stedman report that when he want to interview robert
gate the former director of the us central intellig agenc cia he call the hotel
where gate wa stai and wa given a room number stedman said he wa astonish
when he punch the room number into the phone and suddenli found himself listen to
gate messag that had been left on the hotel voicemail servic
to prevent thi kind of espionag instruct staff famili and friend to never leav anyth
but routin messag on voicemail tell them to onli leav return number or better yet us
a beeper or pager make sure voicemail is clean out daili
comput system
password ar the most common defens against comput intrus but to be effect
thei must be us along with good control procedur password should be as complex as
the user can memor but never less than six random alphanumer charact the
compani must chang password regularli and close them out as soon as an employe leav
the organ manag should train em ploye to log off termin befor leav
them unattend the compani can also instal an automat logoff program wherebi a
termin that is not in us for a certain number of minut will be automat log off
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1882 2011 fraud examin manual
a secur encrypt devic can be emploi to protect confidenti file especi when
transmit them by modem encrypt techniqu found in popular softwar packag
avail at a local comput store ar probabl not secur enough these program ar in
wide us and ar usual no match for a sophist hacker if file ar not encrypt thei
mai be vulner to anyon with access to your comput
a compani should also consid the us of viru scan softwar on of the best
safeguard against virus or ani other kind of data loss is to have a secur backup
procedur
mani compani have not yet figur out what to do with the electron data store in their
system while some form of paperwork file or shred system mai be in place often
electron inform is organ accord to each user person system and delet
onli when the individu choos to do so even when file ar delet savvi comput
expert can often recreat the eras materi thi mean that everyth sent through the
comput from a birthdai greet to a smoke gun document is be preserv
thi is potenti crippl in the event of a lawsuit lawyer ar becom awar of the
storag of data and ar request electron evid in mani case lawyer pour
through backup of document long ago thought delet find incrimin memo such as
i know thi mai be illeg but do it anywai or pleas destroi thi evid often such
document result in the case be settl for more than it mai realli be worth becaus the
compani doe not want to run the risk that such document will inflam the juri into
award larg punit damag
compani should institut procedur for decid what should be kept and what
shouldnt also backup file should be kept under lock and kei on 8mm tape can hold as
much as 1500 box of inform anyon can grab such a tape and easili sneak it out of
the build
fax document
sensit document should not be sent through the fax machin unless both machin ar
equip with a highlevel encrypt devic some fax machin ar equip with a
storag and retriev system similar to that of voicemail system from a remot number
you enter a pin number and store fax can be sent to anoth machin thi allow a
competitor to be abl to retriev those fax as well
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1883
video encrypt
teleconferenc is grow in popular unfortun satellit teleconferenc signal
can be receiv by million of home satellit dish owner some of whom have deliber
tune in to find out thing thei shouldnt teleconferenc should onli be us when there
is an encrypt system in place that will fulli scrambl both the video and audio signal
corpor telephon exchang
privat branch exchang pbx ar locat in a compani tel ephon closet where wire
mount neatli and predict upon row after row lead to corpor execut offic and
other area of interest to competitor these room should be but seldom ar lock and
physic secur peopl with tool belt go in and out with littl notic from anyon
keep the eavesdropp out is easier than try to detect hi handiwork
exampl
in on case a surveil team found that an execut phone line had been tamper
with thei instal a motion detector in the telephon closet the alarm sent reportonli
signal to an alarm central station after two week the central station record reveal a
pattern of earli morn visit to the closet on mondai and thursdai surveil wa
set up and the eavesdropp wa caught
anoth good idea is to have an escort for anyon enter the area the ident of the
worker should also be verifi
computerdriven pbx or switch present numer opportun for eavesdrop
us an onsit or offsit control termin the inform thief can hide invis wiretap
among million of softwar instruct code the hidden code for exampl could caus a
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and termin into a hidden tape
record
an appropri train investig should regularli print out the user configur
instruct pai particular attent to those extens that ar like to be of interest to
eavesdropp the investig can look for modifi instruct code
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1884 2011 fraud examin manual
trade show and public event
sale materi trade show exhibit and the text of speech should be carefulli review
for inform that a competitor might find us employe should be instruct not to
sai anyth to anyon that thei would not sai directli to a competitor dure show
employe should not leav demonstr materi or sensit document unattend
new design model have been stolen dure their transport in or out of a show
foreign travel
corpor execut travel out of the countri should be especi cautiou mani
foreign govern ar unleash huge and sophist intellig gather oper
execut should us encrypt system on all voic fax or modem transmiss thei
should also assum that their room ar bug and act accordingli
technic surveil countermeasur tscm survei
if an organ ha a reason suspicion that it ha been bug it mai be advis to
engag an expert to conduct a technic surveil countermeasur tscm survei
commonli refer to as debug tscm is design to help the organ achiev
two goal 1 to detect the presenc and lo cation of technic surveil equip and
2 to identifi exist and potenti secur weak
tscm profession should never be contact from the area where suspect bug ha
taken place as thi could alert the spy to the fact that hi oper ha been discov
instead it is recommend that organ contact tscm profession from a secur
phone fax or comput that is locat far awai from the target area heavili us public
telephon ar probabl the most secur method for make contact messag should not
be sent from the home phone or comput of compani employe becaus thei might
also be under surveil in no event should an organ discuss suspicion of
wiretap or technic surveil on a cellular phone
in choos tscm profession a compani should make sure that the profession ar
compet in electron and have extens knowledg of design engin and
mainten thei must also be train in eavesdrop techniqu practic in rf radio
frequenc alloc and propag and knowledg about all techniqu of
modul electr wire and instal principl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1885
befor conduct an actual tscm survei expert start with a preinspect survei and
vulner sweep of the target premis the tscm team usual requir a full set of
facil blueprint as well as a visual inspect of the premis so that thei can obtain a
complet understand of the inform that spi might target where the organ is
vulner and how spi might attempt to penetr the inform secur system thi
phase of the project can take sever dai as the tscm specialist test for weak in the
facil perimet secur network and commun system alarm system video
surveil system and other secur compon
onc a vulner analysi ha been complet and the organ risk have been
assess the tscm search can proce a tscm survei or sweep is a comprehens
examin of a facil design to make sure that the facil is free of ani form of
technic surveil equip thi includ electron visual and physic examin
of the site typic the sweep begin with an rf examin in which all radio
eman ar analyz to determin their sourc an electron enhanc search will
then be conduct to locat item or devic that were not detect from the rf search a
physic examin will be perform to locat clandestin devic such as record
microphon and transmitt the team will also examin the phone and the phone line
to detect bug tscm search ar not onli conduct on busi premis but mai also
includ the vehicl cellular phone comput equip and resid of kei employe
tscm sweep ar sensit oper that should be conduct with as much secreci as
possibl it is best to limit the number of person within the organ that ar notifi of
the oper becaus it is alwai possibl that there is a mole within the compani onc
again the compani doe not want to tip off the spy to the oper tscm oper
normal oper under a cover stori to explain their presenc at the facil when possibl
sweep ar schedul after hour to limit the number of personnel who encount the team
as with other contractor tscm expert shou ld be accompani at all time dure
their sweep
although tscm survei can be expens if a compani believ that it is the victim of
corpor espionag it mai be the onli wai to help track down the sourc of the leak
of inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1886 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent employe theft of proprietari inform
a compani can spend year develop a competit advantag over it competitor that
advantag can be elimin in an instant by employe walk out the door
when employe leav a compani there is usual littl if ani attent paid to where thei
go afterward howev if a compani begin to notic that a rival is suddenli take awai it
busi it should sit up and take notic often employe leav on compani for anoth
and take with them the knowledg of how that particular compani oper it price
polici it manufactur method it custom and so on when employe share what
thei have learn with a competitor the competit edg is lost
todai work forc is extrem mobil employe rare start with on compani and stai
until retir on top of that compani ar continu downsiz and lai off
employe in most case experienc employe have littl choic but to go to work for a
competitor or begin consult in their field cutback and fire do littl to foster an
attitud of loyalti among employe
employe awar
employe must be educ as to what inform is proprietari it is hard to protect
someth if no on know what need protect a secret formula mai be easi to identifi
but employe ar often not awar that subject thei mai be discuss over lunch in a
crowd restaur ar also trade secret that would prove invalu to a competitor it
doe not help that the court and legal scholar cannot decid on what constitut
proprietari inform definit of what is a trade secret depend on the organ and
the industri exampl of trade secret includ everyth from note in the margin of an
employe manual to a procedur for ty a fish lure in addit differ jurisdict
have differ law defin what can or cannot potenti be a trade secret
gener to establish a trade secret a compani ha to show that the inform is not
known in the industri that the compani ha made effort to keep it confidenti and that
the inform give the compani some sort of competit edg just becaus inform
is confidenti doe not make it a trade secret under the law howev even though
inform mai not be a trade secret as that term is defin under the statut it should
be protect by employe again the best test for decid what is confidenti inform is
to ask yourself if the inform would provid an advantag to the competit
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1887
nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement
a nondisclosur agreement is a written agreement that employe should sign as soon as
thei start work it usual provid that all proprietari confidenti or trade secret
inform the employe learn must be kept confidenti and must not be disclos to
anyon a noncompetit agreement is an agreement wherebi the employe agre not to
work for compet compani within a certain period of time after leav
gener motor corpor began requir it seniorlevel execut to sign these
agreement shortli after a wellpublic case against on of the compani former
purchas execut gm accus the execut of take million of dollar worth of
proprietari inform to hi new employ volkswagen gm accus him of push up
strategi meet befor he left so that he could gather even more data the employe
deni the charg gm conclud after thi happen that the us of noncompetit
agreement could help prevent a similar occurr
howev the us of nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement is not an overal
solut there ar sever legal problem with us these agreement as mention earlier
there is no clear definit of what constitut a trade secret in some instanc it can be
extrem difficult to determin what belong to the compani and what belong to the
employe
noncompetit agreement also have a varieti of problem first court in some
jurisdict have held that such agreement ar against public polici becaus thei limit
the futur employ of a person theref or in these jurisdict noncompetit
agreement ar unenforc other uphold the agreement but onli if thei ar part of an
otherwis valid employ agreement in these case the employ agreement and the
noncompetit agreement must be sign at the same time or the noncompetit
agreement is unenforc in addit if the employe is an at will employe who is not
cover by an employ agreement ani noncompetit sign by such an employe
would be unenforc
although nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement can be excel tool for
prevent the loss of confidenti inform to competitor their us is limit and legal
counsel familiar with employ law for the specif jurisdict should be consult
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1888 2011 fraud examin manual
howev mani profession sai that the real valu of such agreement is not their legal
power but their abil to creat the right imag thi includ make certain that
employe and outsid clearli understand that the compani is seriou about prevent the
loss of proprietari inform and will do everyth thei can to pursu those individu
who ar steal inform
make sure employe know when not to speak
often employe ar will to abid by nondisclosur agreement but thei do not
understand that the inform thei ar commun mai be confidenti for instanc a
softwar compani employe who work on product updat attend a trade associ
meet and entertain the other attende with war stori about the develop process
and what thing work and what didnt the employe wa later reprimand and seem
genuin unawar that the inform he had provid wa proprietari inform of
great valu to the compani competitor
exit interview
on of the most effect wai to protect a compani trade secret and confidenti
busi inform is to conduct an exit interview dure the exit interview the depart
employe should be specif advis about the compani trade secret and confidenti
busi inform and the oblig not to disclos or us such inform for her own
benefit or the benefit of other without the express written consent of the compani the
employe should be given a form to sign state that dure the exit interview the employe
wa onc again inform that ani proprietari inform should not be disclos and that
the employe agre not to disclos ani such inform without the consent of the
compani
protect the trade secret of other
in the rush to protect it trade secret from competitor mani compani forget the other
half of the equationprev their employe from appropri the proprietari
inform of competitor
if a compani hire an employe from a competitor it should realiz that it mai be open
itself up to a lawsuit for theft of proprietari inform such claim ar expens to
defend and the loss can be substanti even befor the juri verdict
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1889
exampl
diametr medic inc a usbas medic equip provid wa forc to abort a
30 million initi public offer after ppg indu stri inc file a lawsuit alleg theft of
trade secret and patent infring diametr deni the charg but the accus
were enough to prevent the public offer from go through
a compani doe not have to be actual awar that the employe is us proprietari
inform there mai be liabil for will blind that is compani execut had
reason to suspect that an employe could be us confidenti inform but did noth
to investig or prevent it
exampl
novopharm inc wa found guilti by a court in vancouv british columbia of steal
trade secret from it rival apotex inc court document state that a biochemist left
apotex and secretli join novopharm bring with him valuabl trade secret under
the verdict novopharm must pai damag of more than 37 million the judg found
that the chief execut offic lesli dan close hi ey to what wa go on around
him dan deni the judg character
human resourc personnel should ask potenti employe whether thei ar subject to ani
agreement that bar them from compet with ani current or former employ if the
employe is subject to ani such agreement a copi of the agreement should be forward to
the legal depart befor ani hire decis is made
if compani seek to us confidenti inform from former employe of competitor
then it mai run a greater risk of lose it inform to competitor in the long run as
discuss abov the most import element of ani confidenti inform protect
program is the cooper of the employe if the employe of a compani see that
manag ha a polici of pump new hire for knowledg about competitor it is
unlik that the employe will take pride or interest in protect the compani trade
secret
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1890 2011 fraud examin manual
legal issu relat to theft of intellectu properti
the econom espionag act of 1996 titl 18 us code 18311839 make the theft of
trade secret a feder crimin offens under thi statut the depart of justic ha
sweep author to prosecut trade secret theft whether it is in the unit state via the
internet or outsid the unit state thi statut is discuss in more detail in the chapter
on law relat to fraud in the law section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1901
extern fraud scheme ar those commit by outsid organ typic by individu or
group of individu against organ fraud scheme commit by outsid usual
occur in industri therefor the rest of thi section is organ by type of industri start
with financi institut fraud becaus some scheme ar commit by collus between
an organiz insid and an outsid some fraud can be classifi as both intern and
extern scheme
