2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Open Sources of Information


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Open Sources of Information 
Open source information is information in the public domain, or data that is legally available 
to anyone. Spies do not have to penetrate corporate security measures to obtain this type of 
information; it is available to anyone who wants to collect it. The term “public,” however, 
does not necessarily mean free. Many sources have access charges that may be simple low-
 cost copying fees or rather substantial database expenses.  
 
The dividing line between open source information and other targets of corporate 
intelligence (such as trade secrets) is the right to access. A member of the public can obtain 
open source data openly, without fear of legal consequences, and the provider of the data 
desires or has no objection to its release into the marketplace. Trade secrets are the exact 
opposite: no one but the owner has the right of access, and the owner has no desire to cast 
the trade secret freely upon the marketplace’s waters. The taking of trade secrets, without the 
owner’s permission, violates both state and federal law. Known as economic, industrial, or 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.804                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
corporate espionage, theft of trade secrets is a form of business intelligence that goes far 
beyond open source research. 
 
Most of the information sought on any topic, according to intelligence professionals, is 
publicly available. Estimates go as high as 95 percent as to what is discoverable in the  
public sector.  
 
There is only so much that security professionals can do to limit the open source 
information that is available on an organization. Some forms of information, such as 
financial statements of publicly traded companies, are legally required to be published. Other 
pieces of information such as product descriptions or job listings are posted out of business 
necessity. Corporate security professionals do not operate in a vacuum; the need to protect 
an organization’s secrets must always be ba lanced against the need or duty to publish 
information. One of the first things security prof essionals must do is realize that they cannot 
protect everything.  
 
With a thorough understanding of how CI practitioners use open source information, 
however, security officers can limit their company’s vulnerability to the disclosure of secrets 
through accident or negligence. The knowledgeable security professional will identify key 
information assets, then review the open source information that is available on the 
company from a spy’s perspective to see if the safety of those assets could be endangered. 
The security professional will also be able to work with other departments to limit or edit the 
information that is available on the organization so that no inadvertent gifts are made to 
potential intruders. Finally, if a theft of information should occur, understanding how open 
sources are used may help a security officer track down the perpetrator.  
 
Why Do Companies Resort to Corporate Espionage? 
If so much lies “out there,” why do people pay for industrial and corporate spies? Why do 
they bother with illegal methods? Why do companies not stick to standard research to learn 
what they need about their competitors, and why do they use intelligence agents and analysts 
instead of routine researchers? The answer to these questions is twofold. 
 
First, even if the intelligence gatherer adheres strictly to using only open sources, mere facts 
do not constitute intelligence or knowledge. Collecting raw data brings one only to the 
threshold of the process. Data must then undergo analysis to be turned into a useful 
product. Analysis involves summarizing, comparing, and explaining the data. The craft of 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.805 
intelligence lies in the ability of the provider to distill mountains of facts from diverse 
sources into a concise product that is actionable by its consumer. 
 
The term “actionable” means the product must have the depth, character, and quality on 
which an executive may base sound decisions. Merely knowing what one’s competitors are 
up to falls short of the mark. Good intelligence identifies the actions an executive should 
take to seize an opportunity or to diminish or eliminate a threat. It is good to know what the 
problem is, but far better to know how the problem can be solved. Even though open 
sources are available to the general public, organizations still utilize intelligence professionals’ 
skills to create actionable intelligence from the mass of public information.  
 
The second reason organizations utilize intelligence professionals is that the remaining five 
percent of needed information is proprietary. This last segment often becomes critical to 
competitive survival, and organizations or individuals are sometimes willing to sidestep the 
law to obtain it. Intelligence professionals know the “tricks of the trade” for gathering 
sensitive proprietary information that can give their clients a competitive edge.  
 
While legal protections exist for trade secrets and other proprietary information, smart 
organizations do not passively rely on the threat of civil actions or criminal penalties to 
protect their information assets. Rather, they take affirmative steps to erect their own 
security barriers around their critical proprietary information. Such barriers dramatically 
increase the costs, never mind the legal liabilities, of obtaining protected information.  
 
If a company or foreign intelligence service must have the trade secrets of a target to 
complete the information picture they are formulating, they must be willing to invest. In 
many cases, this means employing the services of intelligence professionals. Utilizing 
experience and training, the intelligence professional conducts a campaign or mission using 
secure methods to protect the collection effort, preventing legal repercussions for the client. 
 
There is a cost factor involved in intelligence gathering, which tends to keep companies and 
corporate spies from rushing into covert proprietary intelligence activity. A wise intelligence 
campaign will utilize open sources, at least initially, as much as possible. Only when the 
effort can go no further, and business needs dictate acquiring additional information, does 
intelligence gathering enter the proprietary realm. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.806                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Bootstrap Effect 
With an understanding of the intelligence process, it becomes clear that open sources play 
two important roles. They may in some cases provide all the basic intelligence a company 
needs. A skilled intelligence analyst uses logic and the principles of inference to summarize, 
compare, and explain any missing pieces. In other words, the company never has to venture 
on the high seas of espionage; it satisfies itself  in the safe harbor of open sources. It learns 
what it needs to know at low cost and by legal means. 
 
But if penetrating the proprietary realm becomes necessary, open source information 
provides a bootstrap for the covert effort. The more one knows about a subject, the easier it 
is to discover additional information on that subject. Open sources serve as the homework a 
corporate spy does prior to conducting covert operations in hostile territory. 
 
As any filmmaker knows, the more time spent in pre-production (which is relatively 
inexpensive), the less time and money will have to be dedicated to production (which is very 
expensive). The professional filmmaker does his homework before shooting a foot of film. 
Likewise, the professional corporate spy does not  just show up at the target’s factory at 3 
a.m., armed with a crowbar, clumsily trying to break into the facility. 
 
Instead, the effective spy obtains plans on the layout of the targeted plant in advance, notes 
what type of alarm system is in place, learns about any security patrols, and then devises an 
appropriate penetration plan. But unlike a common thief, the effective spy sets that plan 
aside and first considers other options—less blatant means that may exist to ferret out the 
sought-after information. The spy understands that information is a unique commodity, and 
the theft of information can be accomplished in a number of unique ways. Often, 
information can be stolen without the target realizing it; copies or photographs can provide 
access to sensitive facts without requiring the source documents or files to ever be removed 
from their owner’s control. Burglary, something the police understand and take great interest 
in, is not always the best way to steal information. 
 
 



:


open sourc of inform
open sourc inform is inform in the public domain or data that is legal avail
to anyon spi do not have to penetr corpor secur measur to obtain thi type of
inform it is avail to anyon who want to collect it the term public howev
doe not necessarili mean free mani sourc have access charg that mai be simpl low
cost copi fee or rather substanti databas expens
the divid line between open sourc inform and other target of corpor
intellig such as trade secret is the right to access a member of the public can obtain
open sourc data openli without fear of legal consequ and the provid of the data
desir or ha no object to it releas into the marketplac trade secret ar the exact
opposit no on but the owner ha the right of access and the owner ha no desir to cast
the trade secret freeli upon the marketplac water the take of trade secret without the
owner permiss violat both state and feder law known as econom industri or
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1804 2011 fraud examin manual
corpor espionag theft of trade secret is a form of busi intellig that goe far
beyond open sourc research
most of the inform sought on ani topic accord to intellig profession is
publicli avail estim go as high as 95 percent as to what is discover in the
public sector
there is onli so much that secur profession can do to limit the open sourc
inform that is avail on an organ some form of inform such as
financi statement of publicli trade compani ar legal requir to be publish other
piec of inform such as product descript or job list ar post out of busi
necess corpor secur profession do not oper in a vacuum the need to protect
an organ secret must alwai be ba lanc against the need or duti to publish
inform on of the first thing secur prof ession must do is realiz that thei cannot
protect everyth
with a thorough understand of how ci practition us open sourc inform
howev secur offic can limit their compani vulner to the disclosur of secret
through accid or neglig the knowledg secur profession will identifi kei
inform asset then review the open sourc inform that is avail on the
compani from a spy perspect to see if the safeti of those asset could be endang
the secur profession will also be abl to work with other depart to limit or edit the
inform that is avail on the organ so that no inadvert gift ar made to
potenti intrud final if a theft of inform should occur understand how open
sourc ar us mai help a secur offic track down the perpetr
why do compani resort to corpor espionag
if so much li out there why do peopl pai for industri and corpor spi why do
thei bother with illeg method why do compani not stick to standard research to learn
what thei need about their competitor and why do thei us intellig agent and analyst
instead of routin research the answer to these question is twofold
first even if the intellig gather adher strictli to us onli open sourc mere fact
do not constitut intellig or knowledg collect raw data bring on onli to the
threshold of the process data must then undergo analysi to be turn into a us
product analysi involv summar compar and explain the data the craft of
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1805
intellig li in the abil of the provid to distil mountain of fact from divers
sourc into a concis product that is action by it consum
the term action mean the product must have the depth charact and qualiti on
which an execut mai base sound decis mere know what on competitor ar
up to fall short of the mark good intellig identifi the action an execut should
take to seiz an opportun or to diminish or elimin a threat it is good to know what the
problem is but far better to know how the problem can be solv even though open
sourc ar avail to the gener public organ still util intellig profession
skill to creat action intellig from the mass of public inform
the second reason organ util intellig profession is that the remain five
percent of need inform is proprietari thi last segment often becom critic to
competit surviv and organ or individu ar sometim will to sidestep the
law to obtain it intellig profession know the trick of the trade for gather
sensit proprietari inform that can give their client a competit edg
while legal protect exist for trade secret and other proprietari inform smart
organ do not passiv reli on the threat of civil action or crimin penalti to
protect their inform asset rather thei take affirm step to erect their own
secur barrier around their critic proprietari inform such barrier dramat
increas the cost never mind the legal liabil of obtain protect inform
if a compani or foreign intellig servic must have the trade secret of a target to
complet the inform pictur thei ar formul thei must be will to invest in
mani case thi mean emploi the servic of intellig profession util
experi and train the intellig profession conduct a campaign or mission us
secur method to protect the collect effort prevent legal repercuss for the client
there is a cost factor involv in intellig gather which tend to keep compani and
corpor spi from rush into covert proprietari intellig activ a wise intellig
campaign will util open sourc at least initi as much as possibl onli when the
effort can go no further and busi need dictat acquir addit inform doe
intellig gather enter the proprietari realm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1806 2011 fraud examin manual
the bootstrap effect
with an understand of the intellig process it becom clear that open sourc plai
two import role thei mai in some case provid all the basic intellig a compani
need a skill intellig analyst us logic and the principl of infer to summar
compar and explain ani miss piec in other word the compani never ha to ventur
on the high sea of espionag it satisfi itself in the safe harbor of open sourc it learn
what it need to know at low cost and by legal mean
but if penetr the proprietari realm becom necessari open sourc inform
provid a bootstrap for the covert effort the more on know about a subject the easier it
is to discov addit inform on that subject open sourc serv as the homework a
corpor spy doe prior to conduct covert oper in hostil territori
as ani filmmak know the more time spent in preproduct which is rel
inexpens the less time and monei will have to be dedic to product which is veri
expens the profession filmmak doe hi homework befor shoot a foot of film
likewis the profession corpor spy doe not just show up at the target factori at 3
am arm with a crowbar clumsili try to break into the facil
instead the effect spy obtain plan on the layout of the target plant in advanc note
what type of alarm system is in place learn about ani secur patrol and then devis an
appropri penetr plan but unlik a common thief the effect spy set that plan
asid and first consid other optionsless blatant mean that mai exist to ferret out the
soughtaft inform the spy understand that inform is a uniqu commod and
the theft of inform can be accomplish in a number of uniqu wai often
inform can be stolen without the target realiz it copi or photograph can provid
access to sensit fact without requir the sourc document or file to ever be remov
from their owner control burglari someth the polic understand and take great interest
in is not alwai the best wai to steal inform
