2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/The Intelligence Pyramid


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


The Intelligence Pyramid 
Leonard Fuld, in his landmark book, Competitor Intelligence, argues that open sources exist at 
three levels, forming an Intelligence Pyramid. At the base of the pyramid are Fundamental 
Intelligence Techniques, the second level is composed of Basic Sources of Information, and 
the final level is Creative Sources. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.807 
 
Fundamental Research Techniques 
The initial level of the Intelligence Pyramid is composed of Fundamental Research 
Techniques, which include researching articles in magazines, journals, or newspapers, and 
consulting industry guidebooks. These fundamental sources of information allow the spy to 
build a partial picture of the target, and, equally important, to develop checklists of the 
information needed to fill in the blank spaces. These checklists are very important, because 
no intelligence effort should proceed without precise goals. For a spy to be effective, he 
must know exactly what is sought. Vague expeditions for information will produce vague 
results, so a shopping list becomes an absolute must. A competitive intelligence (CI) 
professional may spend many hours meeting with a client discussing in exacting detail the 
specifics of the mission. If the client is not clear on the objective, clarifying that issue 
becomes the first order of business. 
 
Basic Sources 
After establishing clearly defined goals, the CI professional crafts a collection plan. In a well-
 organized intelligence-gathering plan, the CI professional moves up the pyramid, collecting 
additional information, while continuing to narrow the focus of his search. After exercising 
fundamental techniques, the second level of the pyramid involves accessing basic sources. 
These sources include some that are already familiar: 
• Government sources 
? SEC (from the EDGAR database, www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.808                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? 10-K annual report 
? 10-Q quarterly report 
? Proxy statements 
? 13-D major stock acquisitions 
? 14-D tender offers 
? State corporate filings 
? Corporate registrations 
? UCC filings 
? Regulatory filings, professional licensing, etc. 
? Officer/Director (O/D) database 
• Industrial reports and studies 
• Industry analyst reports  
• State industrial directories 
• Trade and business magazines 
• Statistical sources (example: Standard Rate and Data Service [advertising])  
• Trade associations (from the Encyclopedia of Associations and Directories in Print 
provided by Gale Industries)  
• Databases with stories: 
? Thomson Research (http://research.thomsonib.com) — 3,500 research reports are 
added to this source daily. 
? DataTimes—full text newspapers 
 
Government Sources 
SEC FILINGS 
Publicly traded companies are required to make certain filings with the SEC. These 
documents can be extremely helpful to the spy seeking to build a financial profile on the 
target. Information such as annual and quarterly reports on publicly traded companies can be 
accessed for free through the SEC’s EDGAR system at www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
 
Through this avenue, the spy can obtain the target’s Form 10-K, which contains the 
company’s income statement and balance sheet, information on its debt structure, foreign 
ownership, properties owned, subsidiaries, industry descriptions, depreciation, dilution, and 
other key business information. If the target company has filed for bankruptcy, been the 
target of a shareholder lawsuit, or been sued for patent infringement, this may also show up 
in the 10-K. Most publicly traded companies must also file 10-Qs, which are statements of 
quarterly income, earnings per share, etc. Ot her forms that are available from the SEC 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.809 
include proxy statements, which provide information on stockholder votes taken on key 
issues; and forms 13-D and 14-D, which indicate major movements in stock ownership that 
are pending. 
 
STATE CORPORATE FILINGS 
States require that companies that do business within their jurisdictions register each year 
with the state government, usually through the Secretary of State’s office. This requirement 
extends to all companies operating in the state, not just those that are publicly traded.  
 
Many Secretary of State websites have enhanced search capabilities for business 
organizations, including searching by entity name, and by name of the person listed as a 
registered agent, officer, or director of a corporation. This search capability allows an 
intelligence analyst to find all the companies within a state in which a person serves as an 
officer or as a director. A search can help the CI professional develop a family tree of the 
officer’s business interests. It becomes a useful tool for uncovering lesser-known or hidden 
connections between businesses. The financial strength of a targeted business often lies in its 
affiliates or subsidiaries, which rise to the surface in an officer/director search. 
 
INDUSTRIAL REPORTS AND STUDIES 
State and federal governments periodically issue industrial reports and studies on various 
industries ranging from appliance manufacturers to high technology companies. These 
studies provide statistical benchmarks useful to establish where a company stands in its 
industry. In addition, they help delineate the standards for evaluating successful companies 
in that industry. State industrial directories, special industry issues in magazines like Fortune 
and Forbes, and directories from trade associations serve the same function. 
 
Industry Analyst Reports 
There are a number of industry analyst reports that CI gatherers use to estimate unknown 
figures in a target’s balance sheet. The Standard Rate and Data Service, for instance, provides 
information on advertising rates that may help a spy benchmark the target’s expenditures on 
advertising, an indicator of the organization’s financial health. For practically any industry, a 
statistical source exists that serves as a powerful estimating tool for CI analysts. 
 
Industry analyst reports from investment firms, when properly researched and written, are 
akin to having a personal intelligence briefing about the target. Striving for a balanced 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.810                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
presentation, they aim to tell both the good and the bad about a company. They often 
contrast sharply with the company’s annual report.  
 
Electronic Sources 
Electronic sources of data are some of the most powerful research tools in the intelligence 
analyst’s arsenal. These resources, which include CD-ROMs and online databases, contain 
compilations of data on bankruptcies, new business filings, telephone directories, UCC 
filings, criminal records, corporate data, and many other types of information. If one 
includes the many local, regional, and national newspapers available electronically, the 
research capabilities of one intelligence analyst sitting at his computer are truly staggering. 
 
Large public or university libraries frequently provide free network access to newspaper, 
magazine, and other journalistic sources. More information about electronic sources is 
contained in the “Accessing Information Online”  chapter in the Investigation section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
MULTIPLIER EFFECT  
Analytical software produces a multiplier effect when processing case information. They 
generate output greater than the individual inputs of information. Facts A, B, C, and D 
standing by themselves may offer minimal insight, but when combined and organized those 
facts can generate an understanding of what is really going on in an organization. The 
Analyst’s Notebook by i2, for example, is popular among police intelligence analysts, 
because it can track patterns and linkages from large databases. (Further information about 
these types of products is contained in the “Data Analysis and Reporting Tools” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual .) 
 
The functions performed by analytical software programs can easily be translated to business 
intelligence needs, uncovering patterns related to corporate filings, O/D searches, patent and 
trademark applications, and other diverse compilations of data that, when pieced together, 
can indicate the potential direction in which a competitor is headed. For example, some 
software programs can be designed to cross check patent authors extracted from a patent 
database against an Officer/Director search to show the companies for which key scientists 
serve as directors. The software also generates visual displays of the relationships between 
the companies. All of this makes the corporate spy’s task of unearthing hidden relationships 
and confidential facts easier.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.811 
Creative Sources 
The final step in the open source intelligence pyramid is the use of creative sources. Leonard 
Fuld lists the following types of information as examples of creative sources: classified ads, 
environmental impact statements, close examination of UCC filings, proxies, and the 
building of financial statements.  
 
Classified Ads 
Employment advertisements, in particular, can provide valuable information about the job 
skills that a target company needs and the number of employees it is seeking to hire. This 
can help a spy infer what kinds of new projects are being developed within a company or 
where personnel resources are being devoted. Large-scale hiring could indicate that a 
competitor has signed or expects to sign a large contract. In some cases, employment ads 
also point out defections of key personnel.  
 
Employment ads also give a spy an indication of what the target company pays its 
employees. This could be valuable for the spy’s employer in recruiting battles for coveted 
personnel. It could also help the spy identify employees who may be susceptible to 
recruitment tactics because of low pay or a high rate of employee dissatisfaction (as 
evidenced by a high rate of turnover in a particular department).  
 
Environmental Impact Statements 
Environmental impact statements contain large amounts of historical, financial, and 
operational information. The company filing the statement not only has to supply this 
background data on itself, but it also has to explain its proposed project in detail. Those 
details on emissions, hazardous materials used, and possible accidents stemming from 
operations provide a wealth of facts for analysis by an expert. From such analysis a CI 
professional can develop an excellent picture on the size and operational capability of a plant 
or company. Very often, this kind of information can allow one’s competitors to establish 
the date operations will begin at a targeted plant. 
 
UCC Filings 
UCC filings, in addition to financial data previously discussed, provide operational details by 
describing equipment and materials that have been purchased or pledged for a loan. 
Sometimes previously unknown assets and ties to other businesses will be listed in the 
filings. UCC filings are made at the county level or with the Secretary of State, depending on 
the nature of the collateral provided as security in a financing agreement. Savvy intelligence 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.812                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
professionals review these documents with a fine-toothed comb for tidbits of information 
that can help them gain an understanding of a target’s business transactions. 
 
Proxies  
Developing proxies—people who work with the target on a day-to-day basis—helps CI 
professionals color in many necessary details. Suppliers in particular can be a rich source of 
inside information about a targeted business. Suppliers spend significant time and resources 
to learn about their customers. They know what a customer orders, when they place orders, 
how much they spend, how long they take to pay their bills, and what the business cycle of 
the customer’s industry is. Interviews with these persons can be an invaluable source of 
information for a corporate spy. 
 
Posing as a Customer 
If a spy cannot cultivate or bribe key employees of a supplier, he may pose as a customer 
himself. He can exploit the two fundamental axioms of corporate espionage: (1) all 
salespeople want to make a sale, and (2) all salespeople will do almost anything to make a 
sale, including talking their heads off about what they’ve done for other customers.  
 
In a prospective sales meeting, the spy, armed with business cards and even a brochure 
about his “company,” conveys that he works for a prosperous business. (He can even pick a 
legitimate business with a good D&B rating and pose as its employee.) During the course of 
the meeting, he can ask what the supplier has done for other customers. He will casually 
mention that he has a friend who works for the target company. How well has the supplier 
served that business? As an additional enticemen t, the spy can place on the table impressive-
 looking spreadsheets showing financial data and production run levels and ask if the target’s 
level of business matches these figures. The spy tells the salesperson that he just wants to see 
if the supplier has the experience necessary to handle his business. 
 
 



:


the intellig pyramid
leonard fuld in hi landmark book competitor intellig argu that open sourc exist at
three level form an intellig pyramid at the base of the pyramid ar fundament
intellig techniqu the second level is compos of basic sourc of inform and
the final level is creativ sourc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1807
fundament research techniqu
the initi level of the intellig pyramid is compos of fundament research
techniqu which includ research articl in magazin journal or newspap and
consult industri guidebook these fundament sourc of inform allow the spy to
build a partial pictur of the target and equal import to develop checklist of the
inform need to fill in the blank space these checklist ar veri import becaus
no intellig effort should proce without precis goal for a spy to be effect he
must know exactli what is sought vagu expedit for inform will produc vagu
result so a shop list becom an absolut must a competit intellig ci
profession mai spend mani hour meet with a client discuss in exact detail the
specif of the mission if the client is not clear on the object clarifi that issu
becom the first order of busi
basic sourc
after establish clearli defin goal the ci profession craft a collect plan in a well
organ intelligencegath plan the ci profession move up the pyramid collect
addit inform while continu to narrow the focu of hi search after exercis
fundament techniqu the second level of the pyramid involv access basic sourc
these sourc includ some that ar alreadi familiar
govern sourc
sec from the edgar databas wwwsecgovedgarhphtm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1808 2011 fraud examin manual
10k annual report
10q quarterli report
proxi statement
13d major stock acquisit
14d tender offer
state corpor file
corpor registr
ucc file
regulatori file profession licens etc
officerdirector od databas
industri report and studi
industri analyst report
state industri directori
trade and busi magazin
statist sourc exampl standard rate and data servic advertis
trade associ from the encyclopedia of associ and directori in print
provid by gale industri
databas with stori
thomson research httpresearchthomsonibcom 3500 research report ar
ad to thi sourc daili
datatimesful text newspap
govern sourc
sec file
publicli trade compani ar requir to make certain file with the sec these
document can be extrem help to the spy seek to build a financi profil on the
target inform such as annual and quarterli report on publicli trade compani can be
access for free through the sec edgar system at wwwsecgovedgarshtml
through thi avenu the spy can obtain the target form 10k which contain the
compani incom statement and balanc sheet inform on it debt structur foreign
ownership properti own subsidiari industri descript depreci dilut and
other kei busi inform if the target compani ha file for bankruptci been the
target of a sharehold lawsuit or been su for patent infring thi mai also show up
in the 10k most publicli trade compani must also file 10q which ar statement of
quarterli incom earn per share etc ot her form that ar avail from the sec
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1809
includ proxi statement which provid inform on stockhold vote taken on kei
issu and form 13d and 14d which indic major movement in stock ownership that
ar pend
state corpor file
state requir that compani that do busi within their jurisdict regist each year
with the state govern usual through the secretari of state offic thi requir
extend to all compani oper in the state not just those that ar publicli trade
mani secretari of state websit have enhanc search capabl for busi
organ includ search by entiti name and by name of the person list as a
regist agent offic or director of a corpor thi search capabl allow an
intellig analyst to find all the compani within a state in which a person serv as an
offic or as a director a search can help the ci profession develop a famili tree of the
offic busi interest it becom a us tool for uncov lesserknown or hidden
connect between busi the financi strength of a target busi often li in it
affili or subsidiari which rise to the surfac in an officerdirector search
industri report and studi
state and feder govern period issu industri report and studi on variou
industri rang from applianc manufactur to high technolog compani these
studi provid statist benchmark us to establish where a compani stand in it
industri in addit thei help delin the standard for evalu success compani
in that industri state industri directori special industri issu in magazin like fortun
and forb and directori from trade associ serv the same function
industri analyst report
there ar a number of industri analyst report that ci gather us to estim unknown
figur in a target balanc sheet the standard rate and data servic for instanc provid
inform on advertis rate that mai help a spy benchmark the target expenditur on
advertis an indic of the organ financi health for practic ani industri a
statist sourc exist that serv as a power estim tool for ci analyst
industri analyst report from invest firm when properli research and written ar
akin to have a person intellig brief about the target strive for a balanc
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1810 2011 fraud examin manual
present thei aim to tell both the good and the bad about a compani thei often
contrast sharpli with the compani annual report
electron sourc
electron sourc of data ar some of the most power research tool in the intellig
analyst arsen these resourc which includ cdrom and onlin databas contain
compil of data on bankruptci new busi file telephon directori ucc
file crimin record corpor data and mani other type of inform if on
includ the mani local region and nation newspap avail electron the
research capabl of on intellig analyst sit at hi comput ar truli stagger
larg public or univers librari frequent provid free network access to newspap
magazin and other journalist sourc more inform about electron sourc is
contain in the access inform onlin chapter in the investig section of the
fraud examin manual
multipli effect
analyt softwar produc a multipli effect when process case inform thei
gener output greater than the individu input of inform fact a b c and d
stand by themselv mai offer minim insight but when combin and organ those
fact can gener an understand of what is realli go on in an organ the
analyst notebook by i2 for exampl is popular among polic intellig analyst
becaus it can track pattern and linkag from larg databas further inform about
these type of product is contain in the data analysi and report tool chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual
the function perform by analyt softwar program can easili be translat to busi
intellig need uncov pattern relat to corpor file od search patent and
trademark applic and other divers compil of data that when piec togeth
can indic the potenti direct in which a competitor is head for exampl some
softwar program can be design to cross check patent author extract from a patent
databas against an officerdirector search to show the compani for which kei scientist
serv as director the softwar also gener visual displai of the relationship between
the compani all of thi make the corpor spy task of unearth hidden relationship
and confidenti fact easier
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1811
creativ sourc
the final step in the open sourc intellig pyramid is the us of creativ sourc leonard
fuld list the follow type of inform as exampl of creativ sourc classifi ad
environment impact statement close examin of ucc file proxi and the
build of financi statement
classifi ad
employ advertis in particular can provid valuabl inform about the job
skill that a target compani need and the number of employe it is seek to hire thi
can help a spy infer what kind of new project ar be develop within a compani or
where personnel resourc ar be devot largescal hire could indic that a
competitor ha sign or expect to sign a larg contract in some case employ ad
also point out defect of kei personnel
employ ad also give a spy an indic of what the target compani pai it
employe thi could be valuabl for the spy employ in recruit battl for covet
personnel it could also help the spy identifi employe who mai be suscept to
recruit tactic becaus of low pai or a high rate of employe dissatisfact as
evidenc by a high rate of turnov in a particular depart
environment impact statement
environment impact statement contain larg amount of histor financi and
oper inform the compani file the statement not onli ha to suppli thi
background data on itself but it also ha to explain it propos project in detail those
detail on emiss hazard materi us and possibl accid stem from
oper provid a wealth of fact for analysi by an expert from such analysi a ci
profession can develop an excel pictur on the size and oper capabl of a plant
or compani veri often thi kind of inform can allow on competitor to establish
the date oper will begin at a target plant
ucc file
ucc file in addit to financi data previous discuss provid oper detail by
describ equip and materi that have been purchas or pledg for a loan
sometim previous unknown asset and ti to other busi will be list in the
file ucc file ar made at the counti level or with the secretari of state depend on
the natur of the collater provid as secur in a financ agreement savvi intellig
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1812 2011 fraud examin manual
profession review these document with a finetooth comb for tidbit of inform
that can help them gain an understand of a target busi transact
proxi
develop proxiespeopl who work with the target on a daytodai basishelp ci
profession color in mani necessari detail supplier in particular can be a rich sourc of
insid inform about a target busi supplier spend signific time and resourc
to learn about their custom thei know what a custom order when thei place order
how much thei spend how long thei take to pai their bill and what the busi cycl of
the custom industri is interview with these person can be an invalu sourc of
inform for a corpor spy
pose as a custom
if a spy cannot cultiv or bribe kei employe of a supplier he mai pose as a custom
himself he can exploit the two fundament axiom of corpor espionag 1 all
salespeopl want to make a sale and 2 all salespeopl will do almost anyth to make a
sale includ talk their head off about what theyv done for other custom
in a prospect sale meet the spy arm with busi card and even a brochur
about hi compani convei that he work for a prosper busi he can even pick a
legitim busi with a good db rate and pose as it employe dure the cours of
the meet he can ask what the supplier ha done for other custom he will casual
mention that he ha a friend who work for the target compani how well ha the supplier
serv that busi as an addit enticemen t the spy can place on the tabl impress
look spreadsheet show financi data and product run level and ask if the target
level of busi match these figur the spy tell the salesperson that he just want to see
if the supplier ha the experi necessari to handl hi busi
