2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Building Financial Statements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Building Financial Statements 
The one piece of information desired universally by consumers of intelligence is the financial 
statement. At times, the balance sheet becomes the Holy Grail, a magic key that opens all 
sorts of doors to understanding a business. Spies can, of course, steal balance sheets and 
other financial documents. But, often the theft is not worth the risk. Large publicly owned 
companies are required by law to publish their financial statements. This information is 
freely available on the SEC’s EDGAR database. Even large privately owned companies 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.813 
frequently leave enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figuring out their financial 
posture is not terribly difficult. More difficulty generally arises when the CI professional 
seeks to build a financial profile of private small- and medium-sized companies. The finances 
in these companies are usually held close to the vest. Getting in proximity to key financial 
documents may be risky given that a limited number of people in these companies have 
access. 
 
A much safer approach lies in estimating the balance sheet with research methods. Every 
good CI specialist knows how to perform this procedure. The technique forms a central tool 
in the intelligence professional’s arsenal. The process by which balance sheets are estimated 
affords an inside look at the open source process used by CI professionals. 
 
It is important to remember that the financial statements that the CI professional builds are 
nothing more than estimates of a target’s fi nancial status. Confirming those estimates by 
gathering further intelligence is an option, but the process begins as a refined, educated 
guess. While only a guess, a well-calculated estimate may provide all the information needed 
by the client, and this method involves a considerably lower degree of risk than outright 
theft of the sought-after information.  
 
The CI specialist must always be aware that financial statements tell only part of the story 
about a company. He knows to evaluate them in the light of other information such as the 
history of the business, the condition of its market, technological developments, and the 
condition of its suppliers. Quite frankly, estimating works best when done on manufacturing 
companies. The inputs and outputs of a manufacturing firm are easier to spot, track, and 
measure than with service companies. Service companies, however, can be compared to 
other similar businesses by size, location, and number of employees. If the financials of the 
similar company are known, then an educated inference can be made about the target’s 
financial statements. For the purposes of the discussion in this section, and in order to best 
illustrate the methods used by intelligence professionals, the hypothetical target will be a 
manufacturing company.  
 
How Income Statements Are Calculated 
To build the financials of a manufacturing firm, spies first calculate the income statement. 
They break down an income statement into three components: (1) revenue, (2) cost of goods 
sold, and (3) overhead.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.814                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Revenue Estimates 
Revenue estimates can come from state air pollution control permit applications, hazardous 
materials permit applications, articles in the local press about sales volumes, state industrial 
directories, or by indirect methods. One of the most common indirect methods for 
estimating revenue is to count truck activity at a site, both receiving and shipping, over a 
given period of time. Knowing the shipping dimensions and retail costs of the company’s 
products, a spy can estimate what each truck holds. The same goes for railcars and ships or 
barges. Talking to truck drivers, railroad personnel, and longshoremen can also fill in details 
on the size of outgoing loads and their frequency. In the service industry, revenue estimates 
are frequently made by conducting interviews with suppliers, customers, or employees of the 
target. Pretext calls and social engineering might also be used to trick employees into 
divulging key financial information.  
 
Costs of Goods Sold 
Labor costs can be derived by a spy from wages listed in newspaper classified ads and from 
wage surveys at the local chamber of commerce. The state workforce commission will also 
have wage surveys for certain occupations. The number of employees for the target can be 
gathered from OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) records and by 
counting cars in the parking lot for each shift.  
 
Determining indirect labor costs can be accomplished in several ways. The best method is to 
consult statistical manuals for the target’s ind ustry, which give the respective percentages of 
direct and indirect labor costs. In addition, estimating the numbers of managerial and 
professional workers entering the plant will supply a guideline. Spies look for clues such as 
the types of cars that employees drive (a Saab or a pickup truck?), the clothing they wear (a 
suit or overalls?), and the items they carry to work (briefcases and laptops or lunchboxes?). 
The chamber of commerce may also be able to supply the numbers of salaried personnel at  
a plant.  
 
The types and amount of raw materials used at a plant may be available from the state air 
pollution control board or the local fire department’s hazardous materials unit. Surveillance 
of truck deliveries to the site is another source. The cost of materials is available from 
suppliers or their catalogs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.815 
Overhead 
Overhead costs such as advertising derive from manuals discussed earlier such as the 
Standard Rate and Data Service. Calculating utility costs is as simple as calling the local 
electric, gas, or water company. While a utility company may not reveal what the target 
consumes directly, it will disclose what an average company of that size in that industry 
purchases annually. Newspaper ads and real estate brokers serve as sources on the costs of 
leased plant facilities. The local tax assessor can supply the value of property owned by the 
target. Mortgage information will be available from real estate records at the county clerk’s 
office. 
 
Debts of the targeted business emerge from researching UCC filings, bond rating manuals, 
state economic commission records (if the target is big enough), and from the state securities 
board file of privately placed prospectuses. 
 
How Balance Sheets Are Calculated 
From these various sources, a competitive intelligence analyst can compile a preliminary 
income statement. The elements of a balance sheet derive from the income statement with 
the help of financial tools, such as D&B’s Industry Norms and Key Business Ratios. The 
process of deriving the balance sheet begins by taking a known figure (for instance, sales) 
and looking up the ratio, for the target’s industry, between sales and net worth. The 
intelligence professional simply needs to do some simple algebra (divide the sales figure by 
the ratio) to derive the unknown, which is the net worth.  
 
A similar procedure works for other standard ratios. The rule of thumb is that if a person 
knows the annual sales, the line of business (LOB), the number of employees, and how long 
a company has been in business, then that person will be able to create a reasonable balance 
sheet estimate. An analyst will compare the estimate against known or published balance 
sheets of similar size companies in the same LOB to check accuracy. Consulting experts on 
the industry (bank loan officers, investment analysts) provides further confirmation. 
 
 



:


build financi statement
the on piec of inform desir univers by consum of intellig is the financi
statement at time the balanc sheet becom the holi grail a magic kei that open all
sort of door to understand a busi spi can of cours steal balanc sheet and
other financi document but often the theft is not worth the risk larg publicli own
compani ar requir by law to publish their financi statement thi inform is
freeli avail on the sec edgar databas even larg privat own compani
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1813
frequent leav enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figur out their financi
postur is not terribl difficult more difficulti gener aris when the ci profession
seek to build a financi profil of privat small and mediums compani the financ
in these compani ar usual held close to the vest get in proxim to kei financi
document mai be riski given that a limit number of peopl in these compani have
access
a much safer approach li in estim the balanc sheet with research method everi
good ci specialist know how to perform thi procedur the techniqu form a central tool
in the intellig profession arsen the process by which balanc sheet ar estim
afford an insid look at the open sourc process us by ci profession
it is import to rememb that the financi statement that the ci profession build ar
noth more than estim of a target fi nancial statu confirm those estim by
gather further intellig is an option but the process begin as a refin educ
guess while onli a guess a wellcalcul estim mai provid all the inform need
by the client and thi method involv a consider lower degre of risk than outright
theft of the soughtaft inform
the ci specialist must alwai be awar that financi statement tell onli part of the stori
about a compani he know to evalu them in the light of other inform such as the
histori of the busi the condit of it market technolog develop and the
condit of it supplier quit frankli estim work best when done on manufactur
compani the input and output of a manufactur firm ar easier to spot track and
measur than with servic compani servic compani howev can be compar to
other similar busi by size locat and number of employe if the financi of the
similar compani ar known then an educ infer can be made about the target
financi statement for the purpos of the discuss in thi section and in order to best
illustr the method us by intellig profession the hypothet target will be a
manufactur compani
how incom statement ar calcul
to build the financi of a manufactur firm spi first calcul the incom statement
thei break down an incom statement into three compon 1 revenu 2 cost of good
sold and 3 overhead
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1814 2011 fraud examin manual
revenu estim
revenu estim can come from state air pollut control permit applic hazard
materi permit applic articl in the local press about sale volum state industri
directori or by indirect method on of the most common indirect method for
estim revenu is to count truck activ at a site both receiv and ship over a
given period of time know the ship dimens and retail cost of the compani
product a spy can estim what each truck hold the same goe for railcar and ship or
barg talk to truck driver railroad personnel and longshoremen can also fill in detail
on the size of outgo load and their frequenc in the servic industri revenu estim
ar frequent made by conduct interview with supplier custom or employe of the
target pretext call and social engin might also be us to trick employe into
divulg kei financi inform
cost of good sold
labor cost can be deriv by a spy from wage list in newspap classifi ad and from
wage survei at the local chamber of commerc the state workforc commiss will also
have wage survei for certain occup the number of employe for the target can be
gather from osha occup safeti and health administr record and by
count car in the park lot for each shift
determin indirect labor cost can be accomplish in sever wai the best method is to
consult statist manual for the target ind ustri which give the respect percentag of
direct and indirect labor cost in addit estim the number of manageri and
profession worker enter the plant will suppli a guidelin spi look for clue such as
the type of car that employe drive a saab or a pickup truck the cloth thei wear a
suit or overal and the item thei carri to work briefcas and laptop or lunchbox
the chamber of commerc mai also be abl to suppli the number of salari personnel at
a plant
the type and amount of raw materi us at a plant mai be avail from the state air
pollut control board or the local fire depart hazard materi unit surveil
of truck deliveri to the site is anoth sourc the cost of materi is avail from
supplier or their catalog
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1815
overhead
overhead cost such as advertis deriv from manual discuss earlier such as the
standard rate and data servic calcul util cost is as simpl as call the local
electr ga or water compani while a util compani mai not reveal what the target
consum directli it will disclos what an averag compani of that size in that industri
purchas annual newspap ad and real estat broker serv as sourc on the cost of
leas plant facil the local tax assessor can suppli the valu of properti own by the
target mortgag inform will be avail from real estat record at the counti clerk
offic
debt of the target busi emerg from research ucc file bond rate manual
state econom commiss record if the target is big enough and from the state secur
board file of privat place prospectus
how balanc sheet ar calcul
from these variou sourc a competit intellig analyst can compil a preliminari
incom statement the element of a balanc sheet deriv from the incom statement with
the help of financi tool such as db industri norm and kei busi ratio the
process of deriv the balanc sheet begin by take a known figur for instanc sale
and look up the ratio for the target industri between sale and net worth the
intellig profession simpli need to do some simpl algebra divid the sale figur by
the ratio to deriv the unknown which is the net worth
a similar procedur work for other standard ratio the rule of thumb is that if a person
know the annual sale the line of busi lob the number of employe and how long
a compani ha been in busi then that person will be abl to creat a reason balanc
sheet estim an analyst will compar the estim against known or publish balanc
sheet of similar size compani in the same lob to check accuraci consult expert on
the industri bank loan offic invest analyst provid further confirm
