2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/A Closer Look at Databases


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


A Closer Look at Databases 
There are three tiers of electronic databases: (1) The Internet, (2) InfoTrac databases and 
reference works like the Million Dollar Directory on CD-ROM, and (3) commercial 
databases such as Dialog, Profound, LexisNexis, and D&B (Dun & Bradstreet). 
 
Electronic Databases
 First Tier 
Examples:   
• The Internet 
Advantages:  
Quick, easy to use, usually free. 
Disadvantages:   
Chaotically organized, information 
not always current or reliable. 
 
Second Tier 
Examples:   
• InfoTrac 
• Million Dollar Directory 
• ACL 
Advantages:  
Fairly easy to use, available at large 
public libraries, usually free access, 
information reasonably reliable. 
Disadvantages:   
Expensive subscription rates, so 
not always practical as an in-house 
source for security units. 
 
 
Third Tier 
Examples:   
• Dialog 
• LexisNexis 
• D&B 
• Profound 
Advantages:  
Most use powerful search engines 
or have vast databases. Capable of 
highly refined conceptual searches. 
Disadvantages:   
Can be very expensive for 
intelligence and security units. 
However, these databases 
represent an emerging tool for the 
future. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.818                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
First Tier Databases 
Competitive intelligence involves more than just “surfing the Net.” Of course any CI 
specialist will be well acquainted with Web search engines like Google, Yahoo, Lycos, 
AltaVista, MetaCrawler, and Northern Light.  These engines are useful for locating the 
highlights on the Internet. However, with URLs constantly changing, and the quality and 
depth of data on the Internet being highly variable, the Internet is just a first step for CI 
work.  
 
Second Tier Databases  
As indicated above, more in-depth, cleaner, and better organized data lies in middle tier 
databases such as Infotrac. While hypertext linking on the Web affords the user the ability to 
establish his own pathways through information, this mode of searching often leads to 
haphazard, lengthy, and even chaotic journeys. Middle tier databases provide well-organized, 
carefully indexed data that takes less time to search and carries a greater informational 
punch. Because intelligence frequently has a short half-life, time can be a very critical factor 
for intelligence specialists. The more quickly a search is completed, the more valuable is the 
information obtained.  
 
Third Tier Databases 
Competitive intelligence campaigns frequently operate under a short time frame; finding out 
if a competitor is about to expand production, for instance, may only be valuable if the spy 
learns in time for his employer to beat that rival to the punch. Because time is frequently a 
critical factor in an intelligence campaign, analysts tend to use the third tier of databases as a 
central tool. Those employing the most sophisticated search technologies include Dialog, 
ChoicePoint, D&B, and LexisNexis. These databases are generally able to provide more 
useful information in less time than lower tier alternatives.  
 
Newsgroups
Spies also utilize search engines specifically geared to scanning newsgroups on the Internet. 
These sites can contain immense amounts of intelligence information. When people start 
chatting on the Internet, they frequently reveal a great deal about what they are working on. 
Examples of this type of search engine include Google (www.google.com) and Supernews 
(www.supernews.com). 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.819 
D&B and LexisNexis 
D&B’s and LexisNexis’s business and marketing databases employ conventional search 
technologies that both fall in the upper tier due to their vastness. A starting point for 
researching almost any business is a D&B report.  If the report is lacking, there is probably 
not much out there on that company. With millions of records, these databases are useful in 
developing histories and backgrounds on companies and officers. LexisNexis has so many 
periodicals and transcripts on its database that it is one of the best commercial intelligence 
databases in the world.  
 
i2  
As previously mentioned, i2 also figures into the database equation. It can perform pattern 
development functions similar to other top-level databases. The trend of doing more with 
open sources and squeezing additional information out of them is growing rapidly in the CI 
community. The multiplier effect, discussed earlier, is clearly at work. Information organized 
and cross-referenced internally generates knowledge that can help a client make a decision or 
that can support and enhance further intelligence efforts. 
 
Competitive Intelligence Websites 
In addition to the tools discussed above, CI professionals can utilize a number of websites 
that provide free information about how to conduct business intelligence operations. Many 
of these sites will take a visitor step-by-step through intelligence techniques and strategies.  
 
 



:


a closer look at databas
there ar three tier of electron databas 1 the internet 2 infotrac databas and
refer work like the million dollar directori on cdrom and 3 commerci
databas such as dialog profound lexisnexi and db dun bradstreet
electron databas
first tier
exampl
the internet
advantag
quick easi to us usual free
disadvantag
chaotic organ inform
not alwai current or reliabl
second tier
exampl
infotrac
million dollar directori
acl
advantag
fairli easi to us avail at larg
public librari usual free access
inform reason reliabl
disadvantag
expens subscript rate so
not alwai practic as an inhous
sourc for secur unit
third tier
exampl
dialog
lexisnexi
db
profound
advantag
most us power search engin
or have vast databas capabl of
highli refin conceptu search
disadvantag
can be veri expens for
intellig and secur unit
howev these databas
repres an emerg tool for the
futur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1818 2011 fraud examin manual
first tier databas
competit intellig involv more than just surf the net of cours ani ci
specialist will be well acquaint with web search engin like googl yahoo lyco
altavista metacrawl and northern light these engin ar us for locat the
highlight on the internet howev with url constantli chang and the qualiti and
depth of data on the internet be highli variabl the internet is just a first step for ci
work
second tier databas
as indic abov more indepth cleaner and better organ data li in middl tier
databas such as infotrac while hypertext link on the web afford the user the abil to
establish hi own pathwai through inform thi mode of search often lead to
haphazard lengthi and even chaotic journei middl tier databas provid wellorgan
carefulli index data that take less time to search and carri a greater inform
punch becaus intellig frequent ha a short halflif time can be a veri critic factor
for intellig specialist the more quickli a search is complet the more valuabl is the
inform obtain
third tier databas
competit intellig campaign frequent oper under a short time frame find out
if a competitor is about to expand product for instanc mai onli be valuabl if the spy
learn in time for hi employ to beat that rival to the punch becaus time is frequent a
critic factor in an intellig campaign analyst tend to us the third tier of databas as a
central tool those emploi the most sophist search technolog includ dialog
choicepoint db and lexisnexi these databas ar gener abl to provid more
us inform in less time than lower tier altern
newsgroup
spi also util search engin specif gear to scan newsgroup on the internet
these site can contain immens amount of intellig inform when peopl start
chat on the internet thei frequent reveal a great deal about what thei ar work on
exampl of thi type of search engin includ googl wwwgooglecom and supernew
wwwsupernewscom
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1819
db and lexisnexi
db and lexisnexiss busi and market databas emploi convent search
technolog that both fall in the upper tier due to their vast a start point for
research almost ani busi is a db report if the report is lack there is probabl
not much out there on that compani with million of record these databas ar us in
develop histori and background on compani and offic lexisnexi ha so mani
period and transcript on it databas that it is on of the best commerci intellig
databas in the world
i2
as previous mention i2 also figur into the databas equat it can perform pattern
develop function similar to other toplevel databas the trend of do more with
open sourc and squeez addit inform out of them is grow rapidli in the ci
commun the multipli effect discuss earlier is clearli at work inform organ
and crossreferenc intern gener knowledg that can help a client make a decis or
that can support and enhanc further intellig effort
competit intellig websit
in addit to the tool discuss abov ci profession can util a number of websit
that provid free inform about how to conduct busi intellig oper mani
of these site will take a visitor stepbystep through intellig techniqu and strategi
