2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Favorite Targets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Favorite Targets 
Some of the favorite targets of intelligence gatherers include research and development, 
marketing, manufacturing and production, and human resources. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.821 
Research and Development 
One would think that research and development (R&D) would be the most heavily guarded 
department in a company, but access to R&D information is surprisingly easy. R&D 
personnel are almost always in the flow of information. The open exchange of information 
is part of the nature of their job. They participate in conferences, attend trade shows, and 
work with academic institutions; however, at each of these functions, they leave themselves 
open for intelligence spies to listen, mingle, and ask questions.  
 
Researchers who publish their findings in industry journals may inadvertently include details 
of a project on which they may be working. This is particularly true in the case of academic 
professionals who may be hired by a company to perform research or conduct a study. More 
than one company has been surprised to learn that the results of a supposedly confidential 
study were published in an academic journal. If an academician is hired to conduct research, 
make sure that he understands that the results are to be kept confidential. Also make sure 
that the use of teaching assistants or graduate students is kept to a minimum and that those 
individuals understand the confidentiality requirements.  
 
Marketing 
Insight into a company’s marketing plan is a valuable gift to a competitor. Being careless 
with vital information such as test marketing results, promotional strategies, and planned 
introduction dates can be disastrous. 
 
Manufacturing and Production 
Production managers are often good sources of information. Also, almost anyone answering 
the phone on the plant floor can unwittingly provide valuable information to a crafty caller 
from a competitor. 
 
Human Resources 
Intelligence professionals often pay close attention to help wanted ads, job postings, and job 
announcements. More ominously, they may use this information to arrange a job interview 
to get information about the firm and what the job will entail. 
 
Although the departments listed above are some of the favored targets of information 
thieves, other personnel in an organization can provide enormous amounts of useful 
information. For instance, salespeople like to talk and are an excellent source of information 
on pricing, product innovations, and market programs. Purchasing agents are helpful in 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.822                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
divulging suppliers, information about what is selling, and the costs of raw materials and 
services. 
 
 



:


favorit target
some of the favorit target of intellig gather includ research and develop
market manufactur and product and human resourc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1821
research and develop
on would think that research and develop rd would be the most heavili guard
depart in a compani but access to rd inform is surprisingli easi rd
personnel ar almost alwai in the flow of inform the open exchang of inform
is part of the natur of their job thei particip in confer attend trade show and
work with academ institut howev at each of these function thei leav themselv
open for intellig spi to listen mingl and ask question
research who publish their find in industri journal mai inadvert includ detail
of a project on which thei mai be work thi is particularli true in the case of academ
profession who mai be hire by a compani to perform research or conduct a studi more
than on compani ha been surpris to learn that the result of a supposedli confidenti
studi were publish in an academ journal if an academician is hire to conduct research
make sure that he understand that the result ar to be kept confidenti also make sure
that the us of teach assist or graduat student is kept to a minimum and that those
individu understand the confidenti requir
market
insight into a compani market plan is a valuabl gift to a competitor be careless
with vital inform such as test market result promot strategi and plan
introduct date can be disastr
manufactur and product
product manag ar often good sourc of inform also almost anyon answer
the phone on the plant floor can unwittingli provid valuabl inform to a crafti caller
from a competitor
human resourc
intellig profession often pai close attent to help want ad job post and job
announc more omin thei mai us thi inform to arrang a job interview
to get inform about the firm and what the job will entail
although the depart list abov ar some of the favor target of inform
thiev other personnel in an organ can provid enorm amount of us
inform for instanc salespeopl like to talk and ar an excel sourc of inform
on price product innov and market program purchas agent ar help in
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1822 2011 fraud examin manual
divulg supplier inform about what is sell and the cost of raw materi and
servic
