2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/How Information Is Lost


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


How Information Is Lost 
Information thieves utilize a wide variety of methods—some legal, some not—to gain access 
to an organization’s business secrets. There are seven common ways for information to fall 
into the wrong hands. They are:   
• Accident  
• Poor information security procedures   
• Recruited spies  
• Deception techniques 
• Physical penetration of the company   
• Surveillance 
• Computer system penetrations  
 
Accident  
Accidental losses of information are fairly common and occur in a number of ways. 
Publications such as newsletters or reports to shareholders that are printed by a company 
can inadvertently provide valuable information to its competitors. Also, speeches or papers 
that are presented at conferences are a danger point. Organizations should implement a 
system of review whereby technical and/or security staff review in advance all works up for 
publication or presentation. Another common source of accidental leaks is the press. 
Executives eager to brag about their companies often reveal more than they should about 
research, new products, sales levels, and so on. 
 
A company’s website may also be a source of accidental leaks. Corporate spies frequently 
visit the websites of their targets to gather information that these companies have 
unknowingly assembled for them. Information such as employee telephone and e-mail 
directories, financial information, biographical data on key employees, product features and 
release dates, details on research and development, and job postings can all be found on 
many corporate websites. In some cases this information gives an information thief direct 
access to company secrets; in other instances it helps the spy build a profile of his target that 
will be the basis of an intelligence campaign. Businesses should pay attention to the 
information that is placed on their websites and in other marketing materials. As a general 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.823 
rule of thumb, anything that does not forward the marketing mission of an organization 
should be removed.  
 
Poor Information Security Procedures 
Companies that do not have a system in place for protecting and disposing of confidential 
information leave themselves wide open to attack by corporate spies. An information thief 
will generally attack one or more of the following areas: manual systems (hardcopy 
documents), computer-based systems (electronic files), or personnel (people employed by a 
company or associates of the business). Below are a number of techniques that companies 
should implement to protect manual and electronic information.  
 
On-Site Materials that Are Targeted 
Spies attempt to gather manual systems information by gaining surreptitious access to a 
target’s premises. Common methods include posing as a temporary employee, as a vendor, 
or as a visitor on a plant tour. Materials that these spies generally target include the 
following:   
• Archives (financial, sales data, marketing) 
? In print form 
? Stored on computer media 
• Draft documents, formal documents, and internal correspondence lying on desks 
• Scrap paper in wastepaper baskets and by copying machines 
• Minutes of meetings 
• Legal and regulatory filings 
• Computer printouts 
• Travel documents and receipts 
• Patent documents 
• Pending lawsuits 
• Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions 
• Licensing and franchise agreements 
• Special management reports 
• Audits of Internet access 
• Billings for database access 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.824                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ARCHIVES 
Archives provide a view of the target’s performance over time. They offer an excellent 
source for trend analysis. Even if a visitor on a plant tour is not able to handle documents, 
he can note their location and availability for a later penetration. 
 
DRAFT DOCUMENTS 
Draft documents, internal correspondence, and resulting formal documents may reveal the 
evolution of products, designs, and marketing plans within a company. 
 
SCRAP PAPER 
Paper thrown away often contains valuable information about preliminary plans and reports. 
Hackers “dumpster dive” for this sort of information all the time. Often in the form of 
manuals, technical specifications, and instructions, these discarded documents can provide a 
road map to penetrate computer systems. They can also provide insight into evolving 
products or business plans of a target.  
 
MINUTES OF MEETINGS 
Records of high-level meetings can provide key insight on corporate strategies, investment 
policies, product development plans, marketing plans, and other crucial information about a 
business’s direction. They can also help the spy identify key employees; possibly even those 
who are unhappy with the current direction of their own company or careers and who, 
therefore, might be potential recruits as spies.  
 
LEGAL DOCUMENTS AND REGULATORY FILINGS 
Legal documents range from trade secrets to pe nding litigation to summaries of regulatory 
problems the company faces. Pending lawsuits often detail problems with the company’s 
products, services, or operations. 
 
Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions have obvious commercial value. The same 
goes for licensing and franchise agreements. Special management reports document myriad 
challenges the target faces. For example, a report may examine what is wrong with the 
company’s inventory control system or that the base of parts suppliers is inadequate.  
 
AUDITS OF INTERNET ACCESS AND BILLINGS FOR DATABASE ACCESS 
Audit reports on Internet access, usually from a proxy server log, can tell a spy what topics 
and sites a company researches and which employees are doing it. Billings for database 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.825 
access of services like D&B, Dialog, or LexisN exis reveal companies the target is checking 
out and doing business with, plus topics they’re investigating. 
 
In addition, these audit reports often reveal if employees are stealing computer resources for 
their own personal ends. Undetected activity over a period of time indicates a lack of security 
oversight. These employees may be candidates for recruitment as inside spies. 
 
Guarding Manual Systems 
Manual systems are all human-readable files and documents. These include commonly 
overlooked items like rolodexes and calendars. Attacks on these systems range from pilfering 
trash to infiltrating a company in the guise of a cleaning crew or vendors to outright theft or 
burglary. Reasonable measures to protect documents include the following: 
1. Place sensitive documents in high - grade locked filing cabinets. It might also be 
advisable to lock sensitive documents in a safe when not in use and at the end of the day. 
Locks or safes should be able to withstand a physical attack of at least one to two hours. 
2. Use a shredder for sensitive documentary waste. In the alternative, organizations 
may opt to have sensitive trash disposed of by a bonded waste-disposal company. If so, 
the trash should be securely stored until it is collected by that company.  
3. Receive and send mail at a secure site. Options include mail drops, post office boxes, 
or locked mailboxes. The key is that the site remains secure. 
4. Provide reasonable perimeter security for offices. Use an alarm system, add secure 
locks to doors and windows, or employ both. 
5. Pay attention to securing auxiliary materials such as: 
? Calendars (they may note key events in a sensitive matter). 
? Specialized internal telephone directories. 
? Notebooks and expense logs from sensitive cases. 
? Works in progress such as reports, notes, and graphics on sensitive cases. 
? Mailing lists. All such lists that have proprietary value should have trapped names 
placed on them as a safeguard. A trapped name is a fictitious one with an address 
that the organization controls. If mail is ever delivered to the trapped name, it will be 
apparent that the list has been compromised. Furthermore, the nature of the mailing 
will probably indicate who bought the list, and may help the victim determine where 
the security breach occurred.  
? Index cards and Rolodexes (if they contain sensitive information.) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.826                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Blackboards, as well as diagrams and charts on easel pads (If they cannot be easily 
locked up, take a Polaroid photo of them and then erase the original. Secure these 
photographs.) 
? Computer-paper carbons and writing tablets that have impressions from notes on 
sensitive topics. (Shred them every day.) 
? Computer printouts of sensitive data (Keep them locked up and use a shredder to 
dispose of them.) 
 
Organizations concerned about the possibility of corporate espionage should establish 
procedures for classifying and marking sensitive items and should have provisions for their 
short-term and long-term storage, as well as their disposal or destruction. Large offices 
should have a structured log-out procedure for sensitive files so it is always possible to 
determine who had what document, as well as where and when they had it.  
 
Guarding Information Stored in Electronic Format 
Electronic data presents security problems that do not exist with manual documents. A 
small, high-density 1.2 MB computer disk can hold the equivalent of more than two regular 
size novels; CDs, USB flash drives, and other electronic storage devices can hold even more. 
With a single CD, a spy can walk out of a building with thousands of sensitive files tucked 
into his shirt pocket. Furthermore, it is fairly quick and simple to copy even large files from a 
hard drive to a CD or thumb drive. Employees seeking to remove sensitive data can even e-
 mail it to an external address so that they never have to physically carry secret information 
out of the premises.  
 
Since, CDs, flash drives, and other electronic storage devices have extreme portability, 
organizations must take rigid measures to protect them and prevent unauthorized copying of 
sensitive files onto them. The following guidelines will help organizations maintain control 
over data stored on electronic media: 
• Write sensitive data files to portable disks.  Back them up with another disk. Lock up 
originals on-site and securely store backups off-site. Furthermore, secured storage areas 
should blend into their surroundings as much as possible in order to make the 
information thief’s job that much more difficult.  
• Label sensitive magnetic media.  This should include both an external label and an 
internal electronic label designating the file’s classification. (The Label command in the 
Properties Section of Windows can do this.) 
• Guard against accidental erasure. Files should be set so that accidental erasures 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.827 
cannot occur. This will also prohibit a technique used by some corporate spies whereby a 
sensitive disk is deleted, then the disk, which appears to be blank, is taken off-site. Once 
off-site, the targeted files are undeleted.  
• Employ password security on sensitive files.  Many word processors can place 
password protection on files. Combined with other security measures, this provides a 
fairly good perimeter of security for files. Software that encrypts entire files can also be 
purchased.  
• Have a consistent backup procedure for all files. Backup sensitive files onto disks 
designated and labeled for that purpose. 
• Do not leave disks containing sensitive files unattended or unsecured. In large 
offices, require authorized users of classified disks to sign them in and out from a 
designated librarian. 
• Scan outgoing disks to ensure they have no deleted but recoverable sensitive files. 
If a disk does contain such files, reformat the disk, and then write the non-sensitive files 
onto the disk. 
• Before disposing of disks, cut them up. For damaged disks containing highly 
sensitive files, it may be advisable to use a degausser on the disks first. A degausser 
removes all data from the disk so its contents cannot be retrieved, even by “undelete” 
programs.  
 
Organizations should also make sure that sensitive files are not kept on hard drives. In 
addition, employees should be trained to not leave computers unattended if they have 
sensitive information on them. Before employees go to lunch or on break, they should be 
required to place their computers in a secure state.  
 
To prevent spies from finding valuable information in the organization’s trash, sensitive 
computer printouts should be shredded and mixed with non-sensitive shredded documents 
before disposal. 
 
Access to sensitive information must be limited to a need-to-know basis. Organizations 
should maintain a system such as a supervised access log that enables security to track the 
information that each person has handled. If sensitive information is to be transmitted over 
a modem, the files should be encrypted, not just password-protected. Although employees 
might appreciate the convenience, they should not be allowed to dial into company 
computers that contain sensitive information from their homes. Any system containing 
sensitive information should be isolated.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.828                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


how inform is lost
inform thiev util a wide varieti of methodssom legal some notto gain access
to an organ busi secret there ar seven common wai for inform to fall
into the wrong hand thei ar
accid
poor inform secur procedur
recruit spi
decept techniqu
physic penetr of the compani
surveil
comput system penetr
accid
accident loss of inform ar fairli common and occur in a number of wai
public such as newslett or report to sharehold that ar print by a compani
can inadvert provid valuabl inform to it competitor also speech or paper
that ar present at confer ar a danger point organ should implement a
system of review wherebi technic andor secur staff review in advanc all work up for
public or present anoth common sourc of accident leak is the press
execut eager to brag about their compani often reveal more than thei should about
research new product sale level and so on
a compani websit mai also be a sourc of accident leak corpor spi frequent
visit the websit of their target to gather inform that these compani have
unknowingli assembl for them inform such as employe telephon and email
directori financi inform biograph data on kei employe product featur and
releas date detail on research and develop and job post can all be found on
mani corpor websit in some case thi inform give an inform thief direct
access to compani secret in other instanc it help the spy build a profil of hi target that
will be the basi of an intellig campaign busi should pai attent to the
inform that is place on their websit and in other market materi as a gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1823
rule of thumb anyth that doe not forward the market mission of an organ
should be remov
poor inform secur procedur
compani that do not have a system in place for protect and dispos of confidenti
inform leav themselv wide open to attack by corpor spi an inform thief
will gener attack on or more of the follow area manual system hardcopi
document computerbas system electron file or personnel peopl emploi by a
compani or associ of the busi below ar a number of techniqu that compani
should implement to protect manual and electron inform
onsit materi that ar target
spi attempt to gather manual system inform by gain surreptiti access to a
target premis common method includ pose as a temporari employe as a vendor
or as a visitor on a plant tour materi that these spi gener target includ the
follow
archiv financi sale data market
in print form
store on comput media
draft document formal document and intern correspond ly on desk
scrap paper in wastepap basket and by copi machin
minut of meet
legal and regulatori file
comput printout
travel document and receipt
patent document
pend lawsuit
paper pertain to merger and acquisit
licens and franchis agreement
special manag report
audit of internet access
bill for databas access
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1824 2011 fraud examin manual
archiv
archiv provid a view of the target perform over time thei offer an excel
sourc for trend analysi even if a visitor on a plant tour is not abl to handl document
he can note their locat and avail for a later penetr
draft document
draft document intern correspond and result formal document mai reveal the
evolut of product design and market plan within a compani
scrap paper
paper thrown awai often contain valuabl inform about preliminari plan and report
hacker dumpster dive for thi sort of inform all the time often in the form of
manual technic specif and instruct these discard document can provid a
road map to penetr comput system thei can also provid insight into evolv
product or busi plan of a target
minut of meet
record of highlevel meet can provid kei insight on corpor strategi invest
polici product develop plan market plan and other crucial inform about a
businesss direct thei can also help the spy identifi kei employe possibl even those
who ar unhappi with the current direct of their own compani or career and who
therefor might be potenti recruit as spi
legal document and regulatori file
legal document rang from trade secret to pe nding litig to summari of regulatori
problem the compani face pend lawsuit often detail problem with the compani
product servic or oper
paper pertain to merger and acquisit have obviou commerci valu the same
goe for licens and franchis agreement special manag report document myriad
challeng the target face for exampl a report mai examin what is wrong with the
compani inventori control system or that the base of part supplier is inadequ
audit of internet access and bill for databas access
audit report on internet access usual from a proxi server log can tell a spy what topic
and site a compani research and which employe ar do it bill for databas
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1825
access of servic like db dialog or lexisn exi reveal compani the target is check
out and do busi with plu topic theyr investig
in addit these audit report often reveal if employe ar steal comput resourc for
their own person end undetect activ over a period of time indic a lack of secur
oversight these employe mai be candid for recruit as insid spi
guard manual system
manual system ar all humanread file and document these includ commonli
overlook item like rolodex and calendar attack on these system rang from pilfer
trash to infiltr a compani in the guis of a clean crew or vendor to outright theft or
burglari reason measur to protect document includ the follow
1 place sensit document in high grade lock file cabinet it might also be
advis to lock sensit document in a safe when not in us and at the end of the dai
lock or safe should be abl to withstand a physic attack of at least on to two hour
2 us a shredder for sensit documentari wast in the altern organ
mai opt to have sensit trash dispos of by a bond wastedispos compani if so
the trash should be secur store until it is collect by that compani
3 receiv and send mail at a secur site option includ mail drop post offic box
or lock mailbox the kei is that the site remain secur
4 provid reason perimet secur for offic us an alarm system add secur
lock to door and window or emploi both
5 pai attent to secur auxiliari materi such as
calendar thei mai note kei event in a sensit matter
special intern telephon directori
notebook and expens log from sensit case
work in progress such as report note and graphic on sensit case
mail list all such list that have proprietari valu should have trap name
place on them as a safeguard a trap name is a fictiti on with an address
that the organ control if mail is ever deliv to the trap name it will be
appar that the list ha been compromis furthermor the natur of the mail
will probabl indic who bought the list and mai help the victim determin where
the secur breach occur
index card and rolodex if thei contain sensit inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1826 2011 fraud examin manual
blackboard as well as diagram and chart on easel pad if thei cannot be easili
lock up take a polaroid photo of them and then eras the origin secur these
photograph
computerpap carbon and write tablet that have impress from note on
sensit topic shred them everi dai
comput printout of sensit data keep them lock up and us a shredder to
dispos of them
organ concern about the possibl of corpor espionag should establish
procedur for classifi and mark sensit item and should have provis for their
shortterm and longterm storag as well as their dispos or destruct larg offic
should have a structur logout procedur for sensit file so it is alwai possibl to
determin who had what document as well as where and when thei had it
guard inform store in electron format
electron data present secur problem that do not exist with manual document a
small highdens 12 mb comput disk can hold the equival of more than two regular
size novel cd usb flash drive and other electron storag devic can hold even more
with a singl cd a spy can walk out of a build with thousand of sensit file tuck
into hi shirt pocket furthermor it is fairli quick and simpl to copi even larg file from a
hard drive to a cd or thumb drive employe seek to remov sensit data can even e
mail it to an extern address so that thei never have to physic carri secret inform
out of the premis
sinc cd flash drive and other electron storag devic have extrem portabl
organ must take rigid measur to protect them and prevent unauthor copi of
sensit file onto them the follow guidelin will help organ maintain control
over data store on electron media
write sensit data file to portabl disk back them up with anoth disk lock up
origin onsit and secur store backup offsit furthermor secur storag area
should blend into their surround as much as possibl in order to make the
inform thief job that much more difficult
label sensit magnet media thi should includ both an extern label and an
intern electron label design the file classif the label command in the
properti section of window can do thi
guard against accident erasur file should be set so that accident erasur
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1827
cannot occur thi will also prohibit a techniqu us by some corpor spi wherebi a
sensit disk is delet then the disk which appear to be blank is taken offsit onc
offsit the target file ar undelet
emploi password secur on sensit file mani word processor can place
password protect on file combin with other secur measur thi provid a
fairli good perimet of secur for file softwar that encrypt entir file can also be
purchas
have a consist backup procedur for all file backup sensit file onto disk
design and label for that purpos
do not leav disk contain sensit file unattend or unsecur in larg
offic requir author user of classifi disk to sign them in and out from a
design librarian
scan outgo disk to ensur thei have no delet but recover sensit file
if a disk doe contain such file reformat the disk and then write the nonsensit file
onto the disk
befor dispos of disk cut them up for damag disk contain highli
sensit file it mai be advis to us a degauss on the disk first a degauss
remov all data from the disk so it content cannot be retriev even by undelet
program
organ should also make sure that sensit file ar not kept on hard drive in
addit employe should be train to not leav comput unattend if thei have
sensit inform on them befor employe go to lunch or on break thei should be
requir to place their comput in a secur state
to prevent spi from find valuabl inform in the organ trash sensit
comput printout should be shred and mix with nonsensit shred document
befor dispos
access to sensit inform must be limit to a needtoknow basi organ
should maintain a system such as a supervis access log that enabl secur to track the
inform that each person ha handl if sensit inform is to be transmit over
a modem the file should be encrypt not just passwordprotect although employe
might appreci the conveni thei should not be allow to dial into compani
comput that contain sensit inform from their home ani system contain
sensit inform should be isol
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1828 2011 fraud examin manual
