2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/How Information Is Lost/On-Site Materials that Are Targeted


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


On-Site Materials that Are Targeted 
Spies attempt to gather manual systems information by gaining surreptitious access to a 
target’s premises. Common methods include posing as a temporary employee, as a vendor, 
or as a visitor on a plant tour. Materials that these spies generally target include the 
following:   
• Archives (financial, sales data, marketing) 
? In print form 
? Stored on computer media 
• Draft documents, formal documents, and internal correspondence lying on desks 
• Scrap paper in wastepaper baskets and by copying machines 
• Minutes of meetings 
• Legal and regulatory filings 
• Computer printouts 
• Travel documents and receipts 
• Patent documents 
• Pending lawsuits 
• Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions 
• Licensing and franchise agreements 
• Special management reports 
• Audits of Internet access 
• Billings for database access 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.824                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ARCHIVES 
Archives provide a view of the target’s performance over time. They offer an excellent 
source for trend analysis. Even if a visitor on a plant tour is not able to handle documents, 
he can note their location and availability for a later penetration. 
 
DRAFT DOCUMENTS 
Draft documents, internal correspondence, and resulting formal documents may reveal the 
evolution of products, designs, and marketing plans within a company. 
 
SCRAP PAPER 
Paper thrown away often contains valuable information about preliminary plans and reports. 
Hackers “dumpster dive” for this sort of information all the time. Often in the form of 
manuals, technical specifications, and instructions, these discarded documents can provide a 
road map to penetrate computer systems. They can also provide insight into evolving 
products or business plans of a target.  
 
MINUTES OF MEETINGS 
Records of high-level meetings can provide key insight on corporate strategies, investment 
policies, product development plans, marketing plans, and other crucial information about a 
business’s direction. They can also help the spy identify key employees; possibly even those 
who are unhappy with the current direction of their own company or careers and who, 
therefore, might be potential recruits as spies.  
 
LEGAL DOCUMENTS AND REGULATORY FILINGS 
Legal documents range from trade secrets to pe nding litigation to summaries of regulatory 
problems the company faces. Pending lawsuits often detail problems with the company’s 
products, services, or operations. 
 
Papers pertaining to mergers and acquisitions have obvious commercial value. The same 
goes for licensing and franchise agreements. Special management reports document myriad 
challenges the target faces. For example, a report may examine what is wrong with the 
company’s inventory control system or that the base of parts suppliers is inadequate.  
 
AUDITS OF INTERNET ACCESS AND BILLINGS FOR DATABASE ACCESS 
Audit reports on Internet access, usually from a proxy server log, can tell a spy what topics 
and sites a company researches and which employees are doing it. Billings for database 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.825 
access of services like D&B, Dialog, or LexisN exis reveal companies the target is checking 
out and doing business with, plus topics they’re investigating. 
 
In addition, these audit reports often reveal if employees are stealing computer resources for 
their own personal ends. Undetected activity over a period of time indicates a lack of security 
oversight. These employees may be candidates for recruitment as inside spies. 
 



:


onsit materi that ar target
spi attempt to gather manual system inform by gain surreptiti access to a
target premis common method includ pose as a temporari employe as a vendor
or as a visitor on a plant tour materi that these spi gener target includ the
follow
archiv financi sale data market
in print form
store on comput media
draft document formal document and intern correspond ly on desk
scrap paper in wastepap basket and by copi machin
minut of meet
legal and regulatori file
comput printout
travel document and receipt
patent document
pend lawsuit
paper pertain to merger and acquisit
licens and franchis agreement
special manag report
audit of internet access
bill for databas access
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1824 2011 fraud examin manual
archiv
archiv provid a view of the target perform over time thei offer an excel
sourc for trend analysi even if a visitor on a plant tour is not abl to handl document
he can note their locat and avail for a later penetr
draft document
draft document intern correspond and result formal document mai reveal the
evolut of product design and market plan within a compani
scrap paper
paper thrown awai often contain valuabl inform about preliminari plan and report
hacker dumpster dive for thi sort of inform all the time often in the form of
manual technic specif and instruct these discard document can provid a
road map to penetr comput system thei can also provid insight into evolv
product or busi plan of a target
minut of meet
record of highlevel meet can provid kei insight on corpor strategi invest
polici product develop plan market plan and other crucial inform about a
businesss direct thei can also help the spy identifi kei employe possibl even those
who ar unhappi with the current direct of their own compani or career and who
therefor might be potenti recruit as spi
legal document and regulatori file
legal document rang from trade secret to pe nding litig to summari of regulatori
problem the compani face pend lawsuit often detail problem with the compani
product servic or oper
paper pertain to merger and acquisit have obviou commerci valu the same
goe for licens and franchis agreement special manag report document myriad
challeng the target face for exampl a report mai examin what is wrong with the
compani inventori control system or that the base of part supplier is inadequ
audit of internet access and bill for databas access
audit report on internet access usual from a proxi server log can tell a spy what topic
and site a compani research and which employe ar do it bill for databas
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1825
access of servic like db dialog or lexisn exi reveal compani the target is check
out and do busi with plu topic theyr investig
in addit these audit report often reveal if employe ar steal comput resourc for
their own person end undetect activ over a period of time indic a lack of secur
oversight these employe mai be candid for recruit as insid spi
