2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Basic Principles of Spying


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Basic Principles of Spying 
 
Recruited Spies 
In order to obtain inside information on a targeted company, a spy will frequently try to 
recruit an existing employee of that company to act as his agent on the inside. An employee 
recruited to spy against his employer is known as a mole. The mole agrees to betray the trust 
of his employer by handing over confidential information that belongs to his organization. 
The three most common recruiting methods are false flag recruitment, recruiting by 
justification, and trapping.  
 
False Flag Recruitment 
False flag recruitment is among the most common recruiting ploys. If a spy discovers that a 
subject has strong social or political feelings, he attempts to twist those feelings into an 
appeal to help the “cause.” The spy convinces the recruit that providing information will 
help save the environmental conditions in the Amazon, will further the interests of the 
recruit’s native country, or will provide some ot her worthwhile benefit. Of course, the actual 
intelligence product is used for corporate espionage, not to help the cause, but the recruit 
does not learn that until it’s too late. 
 
Another method that can be used to gain information from a recruit is romantic or sexual 
seduction. This is not as common as the use of social or political causes as a justification for 
misappropriating company secrets, but it does happen. The spy or an operative does not 
necessarily trade sexual favors for company secrets. Often all that is needed is for an 
operative of the opposite sex to show some interest in the subject. 
 
Recruiting by Justification 
If a spy understands basic psychology, he may be able to convince a recruit that spying is not 
amoral or immoral in his circumstance.  When recruiting by justification, the spy looks for a 
person who thinks of himself as a victim. An employee who is bitter at having been passed 
over for a promotion, for example, provides an excellent prospect for a recruit. Other typical 
targets include employees who feel they have been underpaid or unrecognized by their 
employer, and who harbor a great deal of resentment because of it. Under the right 
conditions, these employees may agree with a spy that the time is ripe for them to look after 
themselves.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.829 
Trapping Recruits 
In order to trap an employee of the target so that he is essentially forced to spy on his 
company, the recruiting spy will look for some sort of weakness in the potential recruit. 
Common examples include excessive gambling, drug or alcohol abuse, socially unacceptable 
sexual proclivities, past criminal convictions, and wild spending habits.  
 
Once a weakness has been identified in one of the target’s employees, the recruiting spy will 
do one of two things. If the recruit has some sort of chemical dependency or serious 
financial problem, the recruiting spy will typically finance the recruit’s weakness to the extent 
that the recruit becomes dependent on the spy’s favor. If the recruit has something 
embarrassing in his past such as a criminal record, the spy will more likely blackmail the 
recruit to force her to cooperate. In most situations, the recruiter starts as a friend, helping 
the target meet his needs, but later turns to blackmail to keep the recruit in line.  
 
Regardless of the method by which an employee is recruited, once that recruit has stolen or 
divulged a secret piece of information, the spy can easily keep that person in line and force 
them to continue spying. If the recruit tries to back out, the spy simply threatens to turn the 
recruit in to his employer or the police. The threat of losing his job, or possible criminal 
prosecution is usually sufficient to keep an otherwise hesitant recruit on a tight leash.  
 
Counter-Recruitment Training 
Compromising a person’s credibility and integrity requires a series of moves that are 
generally played out over a fairly extended period of time. The methods spies use to turn an 
employee can be very complex and can occur in a multitude of situations; no security officer 
can see far enough ahead to forestall every potential compromise. It is therefore imperative 
to train employees to report any suspected recruitment effort made against them as early as 
possible. The importance of this statement cannot be overestimated. Key employees should 
be made aware of the most common recruitment techniques, which were described above. 
In particular, they should be trained to be wary of people who:   
• Encourage and finance some vice of the employee. 
• Express a great deal of sympathy for a cause that is important to the employee. 
• Offer to help with a serious financial problem. 
• Attempt to seduce the employee. 
• Attempt to blackmail the employee.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.830                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, some of these techniques involve ve ry personal matters that the typical employee 
will not feel comfortable discussing with their company. That is precisely why spies use these 
avenues to attack recruits. No amount of training will convince every employee to bring their 
dark secrets out into the light, but by making employees aware of the ways in which spies 
operate, an organization may be able to help its employees resist their initial overtures. This 
sort of training prepares employees to recognize a recruitment campaign before it has 
advanced to the stage at which the employee can no longer back out.  
 
After Recruitment 
Once on board, the mole receives training on gathering intelligence safely and productively. 
This is not merely an afterthought; the success of the mission depends upon it. Recruits are 
taught what information they should target, how to collect data safely, how to follow security 
procedures, how to plant “bugs,” and other techniques that will help them effectively extract 
information from the target.  
 
Targeted Information 
Recruits are typically instructed to provide a specific piece or category of information, rather 
than being allowed to indiscriminately retrieve whatever secret information they happen to 
come in contact with. The reason is that most recruits lack the technical expertise to identify 
truly important intelligence data. Furthermore, most recruits are not sophisticated 
intelligence-gatherers, so the more information they attempt to retrieve, the more likely it is 
that they will be detected. Therefore, the control (the spy who recruited the mole and directs 
her activities) typically assigns the recruit a narrowly defined information goal. If the mole 
successfully completes this task, her objective might be expanded to include other items.  
 
Methods for Safely Collecting Data   
In order to reduce the likelihood of an intelligence campaign being compromised, a spy will 
generally provide the recruit with some training or instruction on how to safely collect 
information. For instance, when a spy targets sensitive documents, she generally does not 
steal those documents outright. It is more effective to copy the documents, if possible. The 
spy still gets the information she needs, and the victim does not know that its secrets have 
been compromised. If classified documents were to go missing, this could alert the victim to 
the presence of a spy and cause it to tighten its security controls.  
 
Most spies do not try to remove computer media with sensitive security labels from the site. 
Instead, they copy files from labeled media onto plain unmarked disks or small portable 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.831 
drives that will not attract attention from security personnel. Rather than carry sensitive 
information off the premises, they might opt to e-mail the files out to a neutral, relatively 
anonymous e-mail address. 
 
One of a spy’s main goals is to keep a low profile. There are a number of red flags that 
corporate security might look for if espionage is suspected, and an effective spy will try to 
avoid exhibiting any of these characteristics. For example, a person who consistently shows 
up at work early or stays late may make people suspicious, particularly if that individual has 
not, in the past, worked long hours. While it may seem like the best times to steal sensitive 
information are before or after hours, this activity might actually tip off the victim.  
 
In general, recruits are told not to stand out, and to avoid being labeled as a problem 
employee. If an investigation commences as a result of any security leaks, the recruit wants 
to be far down the list of potential suspects. Recruits are also instructed to keep their mouths 
shut. Obviously, they should not discuss their covert activities with anyone else. Finally, 
recruits are told to spend their extra income from spying gradually and in a low-key manner. 
The goal is to avoid attracting attention. 
 
Communications Between the Employee and the Control  
One of the major rules for an employee-spy is that she should not make direct contact with 
her control. Instead, the spy and control will typically communicate via a system of signals: a 
chalk mark in a public place, an innocuous e-mail to a secure address, an innocent note left 
on a bulletin board, graffiti on a wall, or a mundane newspaper ad. When e-mail is used to 
transfer documents, it is usually sent to untraceable addresses or employs intermediaries 
known as “cutouts.” 
 
When spies must make direct deliveries to their controls, they leave documents, computer 
media, or film and tapes at secure spy drops. These drop sites can be in parks, abandoned 
buildings, behind vending machines, or in other similar locations. The only requirements are 
accessibility, cover, security, and the imagination of the spy and his contact. Prearranged 
signals such as those described above are used to let the control know that an item has been 
left at the site. The control may leave the spy’s compensation at the same site. 
 
Security Measures for the Recruit 
Spies are instructed to not leave incriminating evidence at their home or at their company 
workspace. The goal is to eliminate any evidence trail that could lead back to them. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.832                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, they do not want to give the target any indication that it is actually being 
infiltrated.  
 
Computer security measures for a spy can be of particular importance. Recruits are generally 
instructed not to save any documents — even for a short time — on a hard drive or external 
storage device without encryption. For added security, many corporate spies double-encrypt 
everything they steal with two different systems. The overriding goal is to leave no 
incriminating evidence of the intelligence campaign and to avoid detection at all costs. The 
longer the spy can continue his activities undetected, the more damage he can do.  
 
Planting Bugs 
Recruits are taught where listening devices should be planted in order to gather needed 
information and, at the same time, avoid detection. Bugs are usually placed in meeting 
rooms, offices of key employees, or other areas conducive to the discussion of secret 
information. Equally important is the decision of where to deploy taping equipment. The spy 
needs to place the equipment in a remote location where tapes can be safely retrieved. If 
taping is done on-site, the spy risks losing the tapes if the listening device is discovered. 
Finally, the spy must know when and how to service hidden listening devices, and how to 
safely remove them when the surveillance is finished.  
 
Deception Techniques
In many cases, spies are able to gather information from employees of a target without 
recruiting those employees in the surveillance campaign. Instead, the spy tricks the employee 
into revealing confidential information. Typical scams include using fake employment 
interviews, posing as a corporate headhunter, conducting bogus market research, soliciting 
contract bids on fictitious projects, and social engineering. Each of these scams is designed 
to get the employee to reveal sensitive information about his company’s business. 
 
Employment Advertisements 
Employment want-ads are a great way for intelligence thieves to get existing employees from 
a target company to turn over sensitive information. The bogus ads offer great job 
opportunities to people with qualifications that match those of a target’s key personnel.    
 
The employees who answer the ads think they are applying for a real job; they expect a 
technical interview on what they do. During the bogus interview, the spy will seek to obtain 
as much information as possible about what the employees do, the projects they work on, 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.833 
the equipment they utilize, etc. This is a very low-cost collection method. If the spy meets 
with the employee in a restaurant, for example, he is only out the cost of a meal and the cost 
of placing the advertisement. In a highly competitive job market, fake interviews serve as a 
powerful tool in corporate espionage.  
 
Headhunter Scams 
In a variation on the fake employment ad scheme, a spy calls a key employee of the target 
while posing as a headhunter with a client who is interested in that employee. The 
“headhunter” asks for a résumé and information about projects on which the employee is 
currently working. An in-depth interview by the “client” can provide additional details. This 
method allows the spy to target key employees more directly than simply running fake 
employment ads.  
 
Market Research Scams 
In a market research scam, the spy contacts companies by telephone posing as a 
representative of a well-known market research company. The spy uses a phony 
questionnaire designed to obtain background data to assist in further penetration of the 
company. The spy might, in some cases, attempt to obtain direct intelligence data during the 
telephone interview. The spy frequently offers the employee a bogus reward of some kind in 
return for responding to the questionnaire. These calls tend to aim at lower level workers 
who have operational knowledge of the business, but who are not likely to be as defensive as 
higher level managers.  
 
Phony Contract Bids 
Another indirect method for obtaining intelligence from human sources is the call for phony 
bids. For instance, a spy might send out an impressive-looking Request for Proposals (RFP) 
package on a construction or manufacturing project. The RFP states that certain operational 
and financial data must be submitted as part of the bid. This ruse works very well when 
assessing the ability of a company to manufacture a certain product. The bigger the bait, the 
more information the target company is likely to reveal. The return address on the RFP is a 
mail drop, which insulates the spy from detection. The deadline set forth in the phony bid 
requirements helps ensure that the spy gets the information he needs by the date he needs it. 
 
One advantage of the scams discussed above is that the victims remain unaware that they 
have turned over sensitive information to a spy, even after the leak has sprung. If there is no 
follow-up over a job interview, for example, the applicant simply thinks he did not get the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.834                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
job. If there is no feedback on a bid proposal, the victim thinks it failed to get the bid. In 
general, no feedback is expected on marketing research other than receipt of the promised 
gift. 
 
 



:


basic principl of spy
recruit spi
in order to obtain insid inform on a target compani a spy will frequent try to
recruit an exist employe of that compani to act as hi agent on the insid an employe
recruit to spy against hi employ is known as a mole the mole agre to betrai the trust
of hi employ by hand over confidenti inform that belong to hi organ
the three most common recruit method ar fals flag recruit recruit by
justif and trap
fals flag recruit
fals flag recruit is among the most common recruit ploi if a spy discov that a
subject ha strong social or polit feel he attempt to twist those feel into an
appeal to help the caus the spy convinc the recruit that provid inform will
help save the environment condit in the amazon will further the interest of the
recruit nativ countri or will provid some ot her worthwhil benefit of cours the actual
intellig product is us for corpor espionag not to help the caus but the recruit
doe not learn that until it too late
anoth method that can be us to gain inform from a recruit is romant or sexual
seduct thi is not as common as the us of social or polit caus as a justif for
misappropri compani secret but it doe happen the spy or an oper doe not
necessarili trade sexual favor for compani secret often all that is need is for an
oper of the opposit sex to show some interest in the subject
recruit by justif
if a spy understand basic psycholog he mai be abl to convinc a recruit that spy is not
amor or immor in hi circumst when recruit by justif the spy look for a
person who think of himself as a victim an employe who is bitter at have been pass
over for a promot for exampl provid an excel prospect for a recruit other typic
target includ employe who feel thei have been underpaid or unrecogn by their
employ and who harbor a great deal of resent becaus of it under the right
condit these employe mai agre with a spy that the time is ripe for them to look after
themselv
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1829
trap recruit
in order to trap an employe of the target so that he is essenti forc to spy on hi
compani the recruit spy will look for some sort of weak in the potenti recruit
common exampl includ excess gambl drug or alcohol abus social unaccept
sexual procliv past crimin convict and wild spend habit
onc a weak ha been identifi in on of the target employe the recruit spy will
do on of two thing if the recruit ha some sort of chemic depend or seriou
financi problem the recruit spy will typic financ the recruit weak to the extent
that the recruit becom depend on the spy favor if the recruit ha someth
embarrass in hi past such as a crimin record the spy will more like blackmail the
recruit to forc her to cooper in most situat the recruit start as a friend help
the target meet hi need but later turn to blackmail to keep the recruit in line
regardless of the method by which an employe is recruit onc that recruit ha stolen or
divulg a secret piec of inform the spy can easili keep that person in line and forc
them to continu spy if the recruit tri to back out the spy simpli threaten to turn the
recruit in to hi employ or the polic the threat of lose hi job or possibl crimin
prosecut is usual suffici to keep an otherwis hesit recruit on a tight leash
counterrecruit train
compromis a person credibl and integr requir a seri of move that ar
gener plai out over a fairli extend period of time the method spi us to turn an
employe can be veri complex and can occur in a multitud of situat no secur offic
can see far enough ahead to forestal everi potenti compromis it is therefor imper
to train employe to report ani suspect recruit effort made against them as earli as
possibl the import of thi statement cannot be overestim kei employe should
be made awar of the most common recruit techniqu which were describ abov
in particular thei should be train to be wari of peopl who
encourag and financ some vice of the employe
express a great deal of sympathi for a caus that is import to the employe
offer to help with a seriou financi problem
attempt to seduc the employe
attempt to blackmail the employe
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1830 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious some of these techniqu involv ve ry person matter that the typic employe
will not feel comfort discuss with their compani that is precis why spi us these
avenu to attack recruit no amount of train will convinc everi employe to bring their
dark secret out into the light but by make employe awar of the wai in which spi
oper an organ mai be abl to help it employe resist their initi overtur thi
sort of train prepar employe to recogn a recruit campaign befor it ha
advanc to the stage at which the employe can no longer back out
after recruit
onc on board the mole receiv train on gather intellig safe and product
thi is not mere an afterthought the success of the mission depend upon it recruit ar
taught what inform thei should target how to collect data safe how to follow secur
procedur how to plant bug and other techniqu that will help them effect extract
inform from the target
target inform
recruit ar typic instruct to provid a specif piec or categori of inform rather
than be allow to indiscrimin retriev whatev secret inform thei happen to
come in contact with the reason is that most recruit lack the technic expertis to identifi
truli import intellig data furthermor most recruit ar not sophist
intelligencegather so the more inform thei attempt to retriev the more like it is
that thei will be detect therefor the control the spy who recruit the mole and direct
her activ typic assign the recruit a narrowli defin inform goal if the mole
successfulli complet thi task her object might be expand to includ other item
method for safe collect data
in order to reduc the likelihood of an intellig campaign be compromis a spy will
gener provid the recruit with some train or instruct on how to safe collect
inform for instanc when a spy target sensit document she gener doe not
steal those document outright it is more effect to copi the document if possibl the
spy still get the inform she need and the victim doe not know that it secret have
been compromis if classifi document were to go miss thi could alert the victim to
the presenc of a spy and caus it to tighten it secur control
most spi do not try to remov comput media with sensit secur label from the site
instead thei copi file from label media onto plain unmark disk or small portabl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1831
drive that will not attract attent from secur personnel rather than carri sensit
inform off the premis thei might opt to email the file out to a neutral rel
anonym email address
on of a spy main goal is to keep a low profil there ar a number of red flag that
corpor secur might look for if espionag is suspect and an effect spy will try to
avoid exhibit ani of these characterist for exampl a person who consist show
up at work earli or stai late mai make peopl suspici particularli if that individu ha
not in the past work long hour while it mai seem like the best time to steal sensit
inform ar befor or after hour thi activ might actual tip off the victim
in gener recruit ar told not to stand out and to avoid be label as a problem
employe if an investig commenc as a result of ani secur leak the recruit want
to be far down the list of potenti suspect recruit ar also instruct to keep their mouth
shut obvious thei should not discuss their covert activ with anyon els final
recruit ar told to spend their extra incom from spy gradual and in a lowkei manner
the goal is to avoid attract attent
commun between the employe and the control
on of the major rule for an employeespi is that she should not make direct contact with
her control instead the spy and control will typic commun via a system of signal a
chalk mark in a public place an innocu email to a secur address an innoc note left
on a bulletin board graffiti on a wall or a mundan newspap ad when email is us to
transfer document it is usual sent to untrac address or emploi intermediari
known as cutout
when spi must make direct deliveri to their control thei leav document comput
media or film and tape at secur spy drop these drop site can be in park abandon
build behind vend machin or in other similar locat the onli requir ar
access cover secur and the imagin of the spy and hi contact prearrang
signal such as those describ abov ar us to let the control know that an item ha been
left at the site the control mai leav the spy compens at the same site
secur measur for the recruit
spi ar instruct to not leav incrimin evid at their home or at their compani
workspac the goal is to elimin ani evid trail that could lead back to them
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1832 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor thei do not want to give the target ani indic that it is actual be
infiltr
comput secur measur for a spy can be of particular import recruit ar gener
instruct not to save ani document even for a short time on a hard drive or extern
storag devic without encrypt for ad secur mani corpor spi doubleencrypt
everyth thei steal with two differ system the overrid goal is to leav no
incrimin evid of the intellig campaign and to avoid detect at all cost the
longer the spy can continu hi activ undetect the more damag he can do
plant bug
recruit ar taught where listen devic should be plant in order to gather need
inform and at the same time avoid detect bug ar usual place in meet
room offic of kei employe or other area conduc to the discuss of secret
inform equal import is the decis of where to deploi tape equip the spy
need to place the equip in a remot locat where tape can be safe retriev if
tape is done onsit the spy risk lose the tape if the listen devic is discov
final the spy must know when and how to servic hidden listen devic and how to
safe remov them when the surveil is finish
decept techniqu
in mani case spi ar abl to gather inform from employe of a target without
recruit those employe in the surveil campaign instead the spy trick the employe
into reveal confidenti inform typic scam includ us fake employ
interview pose as a corpor headhunt conduct bogu market research solicit
contract bid on fictiti project and social engin each of these scam is design
to get the employe to reveal sensit inform about hi compani busi
employ advertis
employ wantad ar a great wai for intellig thiev to get exist employe from
a target compani to turn over sensit inform the bogu ad offer great job
opportun to peopl with qualif that match those of a target kei personnel
the employe who answer the ad think thei ar appli for a real job thei expect a
technic interview on what thei do dure the bogu interview the spy will seek to obtain
as much inform as possibl about what the employe do the project thei work on
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1833
the equip thei util etc thi is a veri lowcost collect method if the spy meet
with the employe in a restaur for exampl he is onli out the cost of a meal and the cost
of place the advertis in a highli competit job market fake interview serv as a
power tool in corpor espionag
headhunt scam
in a variat on the fake employ ad scheme a spy call a kei employe of the target
while pose as a headhunt with a client who is interest in that employe the
headhunt ask for a rsum and inform about project on which the employe is
current work an indepth interview by the client can provid addit detail thi
method allow the spy to target kei employe more directli than simpli run fake
employ ad
market research scam
in a market research scam the spy contact compani by telephon pose as a
repres of a wellknown market research compani the spy us a phoni
questionnair design to obtain background data to assist in further penetr of the
compani the spy might in some case attempt to obtain direct intellig data dure the
telephon interview the spy frequent offer the employe a bogu reward of some kind in
return for respond to the questionnair these call tend to aim at lower level worker
who have oper knowledg of the busi but who ar not like to be as defens as
higher level manag
phoni contract bid
anoth indirect method for obtain intellig from human sourc is the call for phoni
bid for instanc a spy might send out an impressivelook request for propos rfp
packag on a construct or manufactur project the rfp state that certain oper
and financi data must be submit as part of the bid thi ruse work veri well when
assess the abil of a compani to manufactur a certain product the bigger the bait the
more inform the target compani is like to reveal the return address on the rfp is a
mail drop which insul the spy from detect the deadlin set forth in the phoni bid
requir help ensur that the spy get the inform he need by the date he need it
on advantag of the scam discuss abov is that the victim remain unawar that thei
have turn over sensit inform to a spy even after the leak ha sprung if there is no
followup over a job interview for exampl the applic simpli think he did not get the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1834 2011 fraud examin manual
job if there is no feedback on a bid propos the victim think it fail to get the bid in
gener no feedback is expect on market research other than receipt of the promis
gift
