2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Infiltration Techniques 
A corporate spy may choose to collect intelligence information himself rather than recruit an 
employee of the target. Factors that weigh in this decision include a tight time schedule, the 
lack of available recruits, or expense constraints. The spy might simply have specialized 
knowledge that makes him the best one to do the job. 
 
Posing as an Employee or Contract Laborer 
Penetrating a company can be very simple. As indicated earlier, one common technique is to 
obtain work as a security officer or a member of the janitorial crew for the victim 
organization. Anyone who saw the movie Wall Street might remember Charlie Sheen’s 
character putting on a janitor’s overalls to ga in access to sensitive information at a rival 
company. Even if the hiring company does a background check on all potential employees 
(usually nothing more than a cursory criminal history search) a good corporate spy will rarely 
have a serious criminal record. It is not likely that a spy will be screened out during a routine 
hiring process.  
 
Security professionals often comment that the best spies are people who have advanced 
technical knowledge; for example, Ph.D.s in electrical engineering or biotechnology. If a spy 
needs highly technical information on a competitor, he may have to use a person with an 
advanced technical background who knows how to identify and/or access the sought after 
materials.  
 
Individuals with high-level technical skills and high security privileges generally have to be 
recruited from within a targeted organization. However, in some intelligence campaigns a 
spy will plant a person with advanced technical credentials in a targeted company in a 
professional capacity. That person gains access to the target’s proprietary information and 
funnels it out to the spy. A person who penetrates a company in this manner is known as a 
“sleeper,” an infiltrator who works on a long-term basis with an acceptable cover. Sleepers 
will be discussed in more detail later in this section.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.835 
Stealing Badges 
Stealing or counterfeiting employee badges is one fairly common infiltration method utilized 
by corporate spies. If badges are in use at the target’s site, the spy can generally fake a copy 
using a desktop publishing program. Contractor badge patterns can be viewed on workers 
eating lunch at local restaurants. Even if the badges have magnetic strips, the spy may still be 
able to enter the plant at a highly traveled entry point where a guard only makes a quick 
visual inspection of security badges as people enter the site, allowing anyone displaying a 
badge to enter. Even if the only method of entry is by an electronic badge scan, a spy can 
still piggyback in on another person’s badge. If the spy displays a badge, an employee of the 
target can be talked into letting him into the facility.  
 
Stealing badges is also an option. At bars and nightclubs, women might leave their purses 
and handbags lying about with security badges protruding in open view. Men do the same 
thing with jackets hung over bar stools. A badge purloined on Friday night will probably not 
be missed until Monday. Once a spy has the badge, he just pastes his picture on the front 
and he’s ready to go. More sophisticated techniques include having someone lift a badge 
from an employee’s purse or jacket. The card is  passed on to a colleague who runs it through 
a magnetic card reader. This can be done quickly, in the car in a parking lot, for example. 
The badge is then returned to the employee before anyone notices it is missing. Later, the 
magnetic image that was scanned from the stolen card is transferred onto blank ID card 
stock containing a magnetic strip. With the addition of an appropriate picture and printing, 
the spy now has a badge that will get him into the facility, and no one knows that security 
has been compromised.  
 
Moles and Sleepers  
If a client has a very long-range interest in monitoring a company, he may place a spy in that 
company as a permanent employee. This employee, known as a sleeper, keeps a low profile 
and reports to his control on a regular basis about the operations of the company. This kind 
of spy, especially if well schooled in tradecraft, will be extremely difficult to detect. With all 
the electronic spydrops available through e-mail, the sleeper never even has to risk exposure 
by meeting directly with his control.  
 
One way to help prevent the introduction of sleepers is to perform thorough background 
checks (where permitted by law) on all applicants. This may help detect operatives who have 
padded their résumés to make sure they get hired.  Of course, a clever spy will make sure that 
there is a convincing reference for every piece of information on an operative’s résumé. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.836                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A mole functions in the same manner as a sleeper. The difference between the two is that a 
sleeper is a person who is deliberately planted as an employee in a company to extract 
information. A mole, by contrast, is usually an existing employee of the targeted organization 
who is somehow compromised, agreeing to turn over her company’s secrets to the business 
intelligence professional. When recruiting moles, intelligence specialists look for employees 
who are stable enough in their professional and personal life to function as spies on a long-
 term basis. As discussed earlier, there are a number of ways to recruit a mole, but the prime 
motivation is usually greed.  
 
Places Where Spies Snoop 
When spies do infiltrate a company’s premises, they rarely have to break into  file cabinets or 
desk drawers to get the information they need. Due to laziness, ignorance, or just poor 
organizational skills, employees often fail to lock up sensitive documents each night. Messy 
desks are the rule, not the exception. Messy desks are easier for a spy to rifle through than 
neatly organized workstations. If documents are removed from a sloppy desktop, they may 
not be missed for quite some time.  
 
Messiness is not confined to documents. Computers often have mounds of disks, CDs, and 
other media lying unprotected around them. Notes on the sides of terminals and screens or 
in unlocked desk drawers frequently broadcast passwords and user IDs to anyone who cares 
to look. User manuals lying about often have similar information scribbled inside. All this 
clutter is created by employees who place convenience before security. Companies that do 
not enforce clean desk policies and do not require sensitive materials to be locked up are 
asking for trouble. Employees should be trained to report signs that their offices have been 
searched (for example, papers have been moved, disks seem to have been shuffled, files are 
out of order), even when no information is actually missing. 
 
Mailroom 
The mailroom is one of the corporate spy’s favorite places to snoop. A great deal of 
information can be obtained from the mailroom by making a simple phone call. The spy can 
learn where to ship and receive packages, how the target’s internal billing system works, 
where to locate employees of the target company, and even the company’s Federal Express 
account number. A spy can also walk into most mailrooms and, simply by acting like he is 
supposed to be there, walk away with cost center account numbers, telephone directories, 
copies of internal communications, and in some cases even correspondence and packages. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.837 
Loading Docks 
Despite the fact that many companies maintain video cameras and security guard patrols at 
their loading docks, these can still be great places to gather intelligence and to slip sensitive 
information out the door. The security personnel at the loading docks are frequently 
contract workers with minimal training on how to spot a sophisticated infiltrator. 
Furthermore, contract security personnel may not be familiar with managers and employees 
from other departments. A spy can sometimes don a badge and a clipboard and move about 
the loading docks with impunity, unquestioned by the security officers who assume he is 
supposed to be there. Meanwhile, the spy is copying down purchase order numbers, address 
label data, and types of merchandise being shipped and received.  
 
Security guards may be trained to prevent the removal of manuals, documents, or software 
that are labeled or color-coded as “confidential.” However, spies can easily change labels and 
covers to a different color. Security officers generally do not have the training to look for 
other indicators of sensitive materials that are being removed. 
 
Storage Areas 
Spies frequently target storage areas for information because they are generally low traffic 
areas, thus the risk of being detected is minimal. If someone does come into the area while 
the spy is there, he will have a cover story handy; for example, he may say he is doing 
research or performing an audit. A prop like a clipboard will usually make the  
story convincing. 
 
For manual documents, the spy will check: 
• Unlocked file cabinets. 
• Unlocked closets and storage rooms. 
• Areas containing archived microfiche records and computer printouts. 
• Off-site, rented storage lockers. 
 
For computer media, he will be on the lookout for: 
• Unlocked storage areas for computer media (such as disks, tapes, and external drives). 
• Unsecured media libraries. 
 
For the open storage of critical equipment, parts, or raw materials, the spy will note amount, 
type, and transit information found on the merchandise. If the materials are kept in a secure 
area, the spy will try to obtain the access code by observing an employee as he enters the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.838                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
area. It is also possible to spray entry keypads with an ultraviolet solution that remains 
invisible to the naked eye. The user unknowingly wipes the solution off the keys that he 
presses when entering the code. The spy can determine the keys the user punched by 
viewing the keypad with a portable ultraviolet lamp.  
 
Hotels
Hotel rooms are remarkably easy to bug and to search. Whenever a key corporate player 
travels, there is a chance that spies will be listening at her heels. By using transactional 
intelligence, spies determine which hotels an executive frequents. Once that piece of 
information is determined, the spy can set up surveillance of the target’s room. For example, 
spies frequently bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel rooms and plant 
eavesdropping devices. 
 
Knowing where an executive is staying also makes it easier to set up fixed surveillance of the 
comings and goings of visitors to the hotel rooms or meeting rooms. For example, the spy 
can spot the target’s vehicle and rig it with satellite tracking to follow his movements during 
a business trip.  
 
Electronic and visual surveillance are not the only spy activities conducive to the hotel 
environment. If a spy can gain access to an executive’s room, whether by bribery or simply 
by finding the door left open by a maid, he can copy sensitive files from a laptop left in the 
room. There may also be sensitive documents in the room that the spy can photograph. 
Trash in the room’s waste paper baskets is also a potential source of information.  
 
If sensitive documents are being delivered by a service such as UPS or Federal Express, they 
can be intercepted after they are delivered to the hotel but before the target has received 
them. The spy opens the envelope and copies or photographs the contents. The documents 
are then resealed in a new delivery envelope. The invoice is removed from the plastic holder 
on the original envelope and placed in the new envelope. The spy affixes a shipping label, 
which is easy to generate on a desktop program, and no one suspects that the message has 
been intercepted.  
 
Spies can view materials delivered in a conventional paper envelope without even opening it. 
There are special solvents called Mail Inspectors that can be sprayed on the outside of an 
envelope that allow the spy to see through the envelope and view the contents inside. After a 
few minutes, the solution dries and the envelope becomes opaque again. With considerably 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.839 
less sophistication, the spy can simply resort to steaming open envelopes and then resealing 
them after she has read their contents. It is generally not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel 
employees in order to gain to access the target’s correspondence. The same is true of 
employees of message and delivery services.  
 
Warning Signs of Infiltrations 
If a spy does his job properly, it will be very difficult to detect an infiltration. Generally, 
organizations have a better chance of preventing infiltrations by establishing appropriate 
security measures such as accompanying all vendors while on-site, and requiring security 
badges for access to sensitive areas. Detection can be difficult, but there are some signs that 
organizations can look for that might indicate there is a spy in their midst:  
• Employees who are most likely to be recruited as spies are those who exhibit some sort 
of bitterness or resentment toward their employer. Be alert for abnormal activities by 
employees who seem to feel that they are under-appreciated, under-utilized, or are 
treated unfairly.  
• Employees who express some sort of political or moral opposition to an organization’s 
operations may be susceptible to a false flag recruitment. 
• Employees who are undergoing a personal financial problem (frequently associated with 
drug addiction, gambling addiction, high medical expenses, or some other personal 
crisis) may also be vulnerable to recruitment. 
• Employees who suddenly undergo a major lifestyle change, buying luxury items, taking 
exotic vacations, etc., with no apparent increase in income should be watched. This is a 
common red flag of fraud schemes, but may also indicate an employee who is being paid 
for divulging trade secrets. 
• Employees who frequently work late or come to work early may be trying to get access 
to confidential materials. This behavior is particularly suspicious when the employee in 
question works unusual hours as compared to others in his department.  
• In some cases, moles will actually discuss their covert activity with their coworkers. 
Employees should be trained to report this, as well as other suspicious behavior.  
• Employees who seem to spend a lot of time in areas not necessary to their work 
functions, particularly areas where sensitive materials are stored, may be attempting to 
misappropriate company secrets. This should be investigated, particularly if the employee 
is found in these areas after hours.  
• Similarly, employees who attempt to access sensitive computer files that are either above 
their authorization level or outside the scope of their work duties might warrant 
investigation. Organizations should maintain an automated journal that records events 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.840                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
such as attempted access of restricted files.  
• If employees have sensitive files saved on their hard drives or disks, this may be a sign 
that they are misdirecting that information. This is especially true when the employee in 
question is not working on, or should not have access to, the file in question. If records 
reveal that this employee has e-mailed the proprietary information to an off-site location, 
this is another indicator of information theft. 
• Vendors should be escorted at all times when  on the organization’s premises. Any time a 
vendor is seen loitering unescorted around file rooms, offices, mail rooms, shipping 
docks, computer media storage areas, or other sensitive zones, the incident should be 
reported as a security violation and potential intrusion attempt. The same is true for 
janitorial personnel, security guards, trash collectors, and other non-employees. 
• Spies may come disguised as repairpersons, janitors, deliverymen, etc. Incidents in  
which service technicians show up without having been called may indicate an  
attempted infiltration.  
• Employee reports of lost security badges, access cards, passwords, etc. could be a sign 
that a spy has stolen these items in order to infiltrate a site. 
• Obviously, if files or computer disks that contain sensitive information are missing, this 
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropriation of information. In general, spies will copy—
 rather than steal—proprietary information, but sometimes sensitive documents are 
actually pilfered. 
• Employee desks or offices that have been tampered with are a common sign of 
intrusion. Reports of stolen materials clearly point to an infiltration, but more frequently 
intruders will only rifle through files, desks, or computer disks, choosing to copy 
sensitive information rather than steal it. Employees should be trained to report 
incidents where their offices or desks appear to have been “messed up,” even when no 
materials have been stolen.  
• Security personnel should log reports of persons who try to enter a facility without 
proper identification or authorization. Similarly, attempts to piggyback into a facility by 
following a person with authorization could be a sign of an attempted intrusion.  
• Reports of trespassing or other criminal activity near a secure facility may also indicate a 
surveillance campaign. In particular, instances where strangers are seen loitering around 
the outside of the facility or digging through trash bins could be signs of corporate 
spying. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.841 
Countermeasures  
While security officers cannot turn their organizations into impenetrable fortresses, they can 
implement specific countermeasures to thwart a spy’s attempts at infiltrating their company: 
• Materials bearing proprietary data should not be stored in areas visible to the public. If 
no other option exists, the organization should only use unlettered, color-coded 
containers as opposed to labeling a particular file drawer “Confidential.” This will make 
it more difficult for spies to tell where sensitive information can be found.  
• Organizations should ask about their bank’s  confidentiality policy and make sure the 
bank doesn’t permit tellers to access information on major accounts without a manager’s 
permission. If the company has sensitive financial accounts, it should find a bank with 
computer systems that use mandatory access controls. Such controls prevent bank 
employees without proper level of privilege from accessing large accounts. Information 
on large commercial accounts should be maintained on a need-to-know basis. 
• Security should establish a procedure for tracking and locking up sensitive data.  
• Cleaning personnel should be properly bonded and identified, and their access to the 
facility should be controlled. 
• Vendors should have verified credentials and must be escorted by a company 
representative during their visit.  
• Any proprietary lists must be password protected and trapped. 
• Other general countermeasures include educating employees to properly store sensitive 
data and to question the credentials of anyone visiting the site. Employees should also be 
instructed as to what information they may disclose over the telephone. 
• Employees should sign nondisclosure agreements. In addition, the legal department 
should be consulted about integrating vendor and supplier nondisclosure agreements 
into standard contracts. 
 
 



:


infiltr techniqu
a corpor spy mai choos to collect intellig inform himself rather than recruit an
employe of the target factor that weigh in thi decis includ a tight time schedul the
lack of avail recruit or expens constraint the spy might simpli have special
knowledg that make him the best on to do the job
pose as an employe or contract labor
penetr a compani can be veri simpl as indic earlier on common techniqu is to
obtain work as a secur offic or a member of the janitori crew for the victim
organ anyon who saw the movi wall street might rememb charli sheen
charact put on a janitor overal to ga in access to sensit inform at a rival
compani even if the hire compani doe a background check on all potenti employe
usual noth more than a cursori crimin histori search a good corpor spy will rare
have a seriou crimin record it is not like that a spy will be screen out dure a routin
hire process
secur profession often comment that the best spi ar peopl who have advanc
technic knowledg for exampl phd in electr engin or biotechnolog if a spy
need highli technic inform on a competitor he mai have to us a person with an
advanc technic background who know how to identifi andor access the sought after
materi
individu with highlevel technic skill and high secur privileg gener have to be
recruit from within a target organ howev in some intellig campaign a
spy will plant a person with advanc technic credenti in a target compani in a
profession capac that person gain access to the target proprietari inform and
funnel it out to the spy a person who penetr a compani in thi manner is known as a
sleeper an infiltr who work on a longterm basi with an accept cover sleeper
will be discuss in more detail later in thi section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1835
steal badg
steal or counterfeit employe badg is on fairli common infiltr method util
by corpor spi if badg ar in us at the target site the spy can gener fake a copi
us a desktop publish program contractor badg pattern can be view on worker
eat lunch at local restaur even if the badg have magnet strip the spy mai still be
abl to enter the plant at a highli travel entri point where a guard onli make a quick
visual inspect of secur badg as peopl enter the site allow anyon displai a
badg to enter even if the onli method of entri is by an electron badg scan a spy can
still piggyback in on anoth person badg if the spy displai a badg an employe of the
target can be talk into let him into the facil
steal badg is also an option at bar and nightclub women might leav their purs
and handbag ly about with secur badg protrud in open view men do the same
thing with jacket hung over bar stool a badg purloin on fridai night will probabl not
be miss until mondai onc a spy ha the badg he just past hi pictur on the front
and he readi to go more sophist techniqu includ have someon lift a badg
from an employe purs or jacket the card is pass on to a colleagu who run it through
a magnet card reader thi can be done quickli in the car in a park lot for exampl
the badg is then return to the employe befor anyon notic it is miss later the
magnet imag that wa scan from the stolen card is transfer onto blank id card
stock contain a magnet strip with the addit of an appropri pictur and print
the spy now ha a badg that will get him into the facil and no on know that secur
ha been compromis
mole and sleeper
if a client ha a veri longrang interest in monitor a compani he mai place a spy in that
compani as a perman employe thi employe known as a sleeper keep a low profil
and report to hi control on a regular basi about the oper of the compani thi kind
of spy especi if well school in tradecraft will be extrem difficult to detect with all
the electron spydrop avail through email the sleeper never even ha to risk exposur
by meet directli with hi control
on wai to help prevent the introduct of sleeper is to perform thorough background
check where permit by law on all applic thi mai help detect oper who have
pad their rsum to make sure thei get hire of cours a clever spy will make sure that
there is a convinc refer for everi piec of inform on an oper rsum
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1836 2011 fraud examin manual
a mole function in the same manner as a sleeper the differ between the two is that a
sleeper is a person who is deliber plant as an employe in a compani to extract
inform a mole by contrast is usual an exist employe of the target organ
who is somehow compromis agre to turn over her compani secret to the busi
intellig profession when recruit mole intellig specialist look for employe
who ar stabl enough in their profession and person life to function as spi on a long
term basi as discuss earlier there ar a number of wai to recruit a mole but the prime
motiv is usual greed
place where spi snoop
when spi do infiltr a compani premis thei rare have to break into file cabinet or
desk drawer to get the inform thei need due to lazi ignor or just poor
organiz skill employe often fail to lock up sensit document each night messi
desk ar the rule not the except messi desk ar easier for a spy to rifl through than
neatli organ workstat if document ar remov from a sloppi desktop thei mai
not be miss for quit some time
messi is not confin to document comput often have mound of disk cd and
other media ly unprotect around them note on the side of termin and screen or
in unlock desk drawer frequent broadcast password and user id to anyon who care
to look user manual ly about often have similar inform scribbl insid all thi
clutter is creat by employe who place conveni befor secur compani that do
not enforc clean desk polici and do not requir sensit materi to be lock up ar
ask for troubl employe should be train to report sign that their offic have been
search for exampl paper have been move disk seem to have been shuffl file ar
out of order even when no inform is actual miss
mailroom
the mailroom is on of the corpor spy favorit place to snoop a great deal of
inform can be obtain from the mailroom by make a simpl phone call the spy can
learn where to ship and receiv packag how the target intern bill system work
where to locat employe of the target compani and even the compani feder express
account number a spy can also walk into most mailroom and simpli by act like he is
suppos to be there walk awai with cost center account number telephon directori
copi of intern commun and in some case even correspond and packag
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1837
load dock
despit the fact that mani compani maintain video camera and secur guard patrol at
their load dock these can still be great place to gather intellig and to slip sensit
inform out the door the secur personnel at the load dock ar frequent
contract worker with minim train on how to spot a sophist infiltr
furthermor contract secur personnel mai not be familiar with manag and employe
from other depart a spy can sometim don a badg and a clipboard and move about
the load dock with impun unquest by the secur offic who assum he is
suppos to be there meanwhil the spy is copi down purchas order number address
label data and type of merchandis be ship and receiv
secur guard mai be train to prevent the remov of manual document or softwar
that ar label or colorcod as confidenti howev spi can easili chang label and
cover to a differ color secur offic gener do not have the train to look for
other indic of sensit materi that ar be remov
storag area
spi frequent target storag area for inform becaus thei ar gener low traffic
area thu the risk of be detect is minim if someon doe come into the area while
the spy is there he will have a cover stori handi for exampl he mai sai he is do
research or perform an audit a prop like a clipboard will usual make the
stori convinc
for manual document the spy will check
unlock file cabinet
unlock closet and storag room
area contain archiv microfich record and comput printout
offsit rent storag locker
for comput media he will be on the lookout for
unlock storag area for comput media such as disk tape and extern drive
unsecur media librari
for the open storag of critic equip part or raw materi the spy will note amount
type and transit inform found on the merchandis if the materi ar kept in a secur
area the spy will try to obtain the access code by observ an employe as he enter the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1838 2011 fraud examin manual
area it is also possibl to sprai entri keypad with an ultraviolet solut that remain
invis to the nake ey the user unknowingli wipe the solut off the kei that he
press when enter the code the spy can determin the kei the user punch by
view the keypad with a portabl ultraviolet lamp
hotel
hotel room ar remark easi to bug and to search whenev a kei corpor player
travel there is a chanc that spi will be listen at her heel by us transact
intellig spi determin which hotel an execut frequent onc that piec of
inform is determin the spy can set up surveil of the target room for exampl
spi frequent bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel room and plant
eavesdrop devic
know where an execut is stai also make it easier to set up fix surveil of the
come and go of visitor to the hotel room or meet room for exampl the spy
can spot the target vehicl and rig it with satellit track to follow hi movement dure
a busi trip
electron and visual surveil ar not the onli spy activ conduc to the hotel
environ if a spy can gain access to an execut room whether by briberi or simpli
by find the door left open by a maid he can copi sensit file from a laptop left in the
room there mai also be sensit document in the room that the spy can photograph
trash in the room wast paper basket is also a potenti sourc of inform
if sensit document ar be deliv by a servic such as up or feder express thei
can be intercept after thei ar deliv to the hotel but befor the target ha receiv
them the spy open the envelop and copi or photograph the content the document
ar then reseal in a new deliveri envelop the invoic is remov from the plastic holder
on the origin envelop and place in the new envelop the spy affix a ship label
which is easi to gener on a desktop program and no on suspect that the messag ha
been intercept
spi can view materi deliv in a convent paper envelop without even open it
there ar special solvent call mail inspector that can be sprai on the outsid of an
envelop that allow the spy to see through the envelop and view the content insid after a
few minut the solut dri and the envelop becom opaqu again with consider
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1839
less sophist the spy can simpli resort to steam open envelop and then reseal
them after she ha read their content it is gener not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel
employe in order to gain to access the target correspond the same is true of
employe of messag and deliveri servic
warn sign of infiltr
if a spy doe hi job properli it will be veri difficult to detect an infiltr gener
organ have a better chanc of prevent infiltr by establish appropri
secur measur such as accompani all vendor while onsit and requir secur
badg for access to sensit area detect can be difficult but there ar some sign that
organ can look for that might indic there is a spy in their midst
employe who ar most like to be recruit as spi ar those who exhibit some sort
of bitter or resent toward their employ be alert for abnorm activ by
employe who seem to feel that thei ar underappreci underutil or ar
treat unfairli
employe who express some sort of polit or moral opposit to an organ
oper mai be suscept to a fals flag recruit
employe who ar undergo a person financi problem frequent associ with
drug addict gambl addict high medic expens or some other person
crisi mai also be vulner to recruit
employe who suddenli undergo a major lifestyl chang bui luxuri item take
exot vacat etc with no appar increas in incom should be watch thi is a
common red flag of fraud scheme but mai also indic an employe who is be paid
for divulg trade secret
employe who frequent work late or come to work earli mai be try to get access
to confidenti materi thi behavior is particularli suspici when the employe in
question work unusu hour as compar to other in hi depart
in some case mole will actual discuss their covert activ with their cowork
employe should be train to report thi as well as other suspici behavior
employe who seem to spend a lot of time in area not necessari to their work
function particularli area where sensit materi ar store mai be attempt to
misappropri compani secret thi should be investig particularli if the employe
is found in these area after hour
similarli employe who attempt to access sensit comput file that ar either abov
their author level or outsid the scope of their work duti might warrant
investig organ should maintain an autom journal that record event
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1840 2011 fraud examin manual
such as attempt access of restrict file
if employe have sensit file save on their hard drive or disk thi mai be a sign
that thei ar misdirect that inform thi is especi true when the employe in
question is not work on or should not have access to the file in question if record
reveal that thi employe ha email the proprietari inform to an offsit locat
thi is anoth indic of inform theft
vendor should be escort at all time when on the organ premis ani time a
vendor is seen loiter unescort around file room offic mail room ship
dock comput media storag area or other sensit zone the incid should be
report as a secur violat and potenti intrus attempt the same is true for
janitori personnel secur guard trash collector and other nonemploye
spi mai come disguis as repairperson janitor deliverymen etc incid in
which servic technician show up without have been call mai indic an
attempt infiltr
employe report of lost secur badg access card password etc could be a sign
that a spy ha stolen these item in order to infiltr a site
obvious if file or comput disk that contain sensit inform ar miss thi
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropri of inform in gener spi will copi
rather than stealproprietari inform but sometim sensit document ar
actual pilfer
employe desk or offic that have been tamper with ar a common sign of
intrus report of stolen materi clearli point to an infiltr but more frequent
intrud will onli rifl through file desk or comput disk choos to copi
sensit inform rather than steal it employe should be train to report
incid where their offic or desk appear to have been mess up even when no
materi have been stolen
secur personnel should log report of person who try to enter a facil without
proper identif or author similarli attempt to piggyback into a facil by
follow a person with author could be a sign of an attempt intrus
report of trespass or other crimin activ near a secur facil mai also indic a
surveil campaign in particular instanc where stranger ar seen loiter around
the outsid of the facil or dig through trash bin could be sign of corpor
spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1841
countermeasur
while secur offic cannot turn their organ into impenetr fortress thei can
implement specif countermeasur to thwart a spy attempt at infiltr their compani
materi bear proprietari data should not be store in area visibl to the public if
no other option exist the organ should onli us unlett colorcod
contain as oppos to label a particular file drawer confidenti thi will make
it more difficult for spi to tell where sensit inform can be found
organ should ask about their bank confidenti polici and make sure the
bank doesnt permit teller to access inform on major account without a manag
permiss if the compani ha sensit financi account it should find a bank with
comput system that us mandatori access control such control prevent bank
employe without proper level of privileg from access larg account inform
on larg commerci account should be maintain on a needtoknow basi
secur should establish a procedur for track and lock up sensit data
clean personnel should be properli bond and identifi and their access to the
facil should be control
vendor should have verifi credenti and must be escort by a compani
repres dure their visit
ani proprietari list must be password protect and trap
other gener countermeasur includ educ employe to properli store sensit
data and to question the credenti of anyon visit the site employe should also be
instruct as to what inform thei mai disclos over the telephon
employe should sign nondisclosur agreement in addit the legal depart
should be consult about integr vendor and supplier nondisclosur agreement
into standard contract
