2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Places Where Spies Snoop


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Places Where Spies Snoop 
When spies do infiltrate a company’s premises, they rarely have to break into  file cabinets or 
desk drawers to get the information they need. Due to laziness, ignorance, or just poor 
organizational skills, employees often fail to lock up sensitive documents each night. Messy 
desks are the rule, not the exception. Messy desks are easier for a spy to rifle through than 
neatly organized workstations. If documents are removed from a sloppy desktop, they may 
not be missed for quite some time.  
 
Messiness is not confined to documents. Computers often have mounds of disks, CDs, and 
other media lying unprotected around them. Notes on the sides of terminals and screens or 
in unlocked desk drawers frequently broadcast passwords and user IDs to anyone who cares 
to look. User manuals lying about often have similar information scribbled inside. All this 
clutter is created by employees who place convenience before security. Companies that do 
not enforce clean desk policies and do not require sensitive materials to be locked up are 
asking for trouble. Employees should be trained to report signs that their offices have been 
searched (for example, papers have been moved, disks seem to have been shuffled, files are 
out of order), even when no information is actually missing. 
 



:


place where spi snoop
when spi do infiltr a compani premis thei rare have to break into file cabinet or
desk drawer to get the inform thei need due to lazi ignor or just poor
organiz skill employe often fail to lock up sensit document each night messi
desk ar the rule not the except messi desk ar easier for a spy to rifl through than
neatli organ workstat if document ar remov from a sloppi desktop thei mai
not be miss for quit some time
messi is not confin to document comput often have mound of disk cd and
other media ly unprotect around them note on the side of termin and screen or
in unlock desk drawer frequent broadcast password and user id to anyon who care
to look user manual ly about often have similar inform scribbl insid all thi
clutter is creat by employe who place conveni befor secur compani that do
not enforc clean desk polici and do not requir sensit materi to be lock up ar
ask for troubl employe should be train to report sign that their offic have been
search for exampl paper have been move disk seem to have been shuffl file ar
out of order even when no inform is actual miss
