2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Hotels


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Hotels
Hotel rooms are remarkably easy to bug and to search. Whenever a key corporate player 
travels, there is a chance that spies will be listening at her heels. By using transactional 
intelligence, spies determine which hotels an executive frequents. Once that piece of 
information is determined, the spy can set up surveillance of the target’s room. For example, 
spies frequently bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel rooms and plant 
eavesdropping devices. 
 
Knowing where an executive is staying also makes it easier to set up fixed surveillance of the 
comings and goings of visitors to the hotel rooms or meeting rooms. For example, the spy 
can spot the target’s vehicle and rig it with satellite tracking to follow his movements during 
a business trip.  
 
Electronic and visual surveillance are not the only spy activities conducive to the hotel 
environment. If a spy can gain access to an executive’s room, whether by bribery or simply 
by finding the door left open by a maid, he can copy sensitive files from a laptop left in the 
room. There may also be sensitive documents in the room that the spy can photograph. 
Trash in the room’s waste paper baskets is also a potential source of information.  
 
If sensitive documents are being delivered by a service such as UPS or Federal Express, they 
can be intercepted after they are delivered to the hotel but before the target has received 
them. The spy opens the envelope and copies or photographs the contents. The documents 
are then resealed in a new delivery envelope. The invoice is removed from the plastic holder 
on the original envelope and placed in the new envelope. The spy affixes a shipping label, 
which is easy to generate on a desktop program, and no one suspects that the message has 
been intercepted.  
 
Spies can view materials delivered in a conventional paper envelope without even opening it. 
There are special solvents called Mail Inspectors that can be sprayed on the outside of an 
envelope that allow the spy to see through the envelope and view the contents inside. After a 
few minutes, the solution dries and the envelope becomes opaque again. With considerably 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.839 
less sophistication, the spy can simply resort to steaming open envelopes and then resealing 
them after she has read their contents. It is generally not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel 
employees in order to gain to access the target’s correspondence. The same is true of 
employees of message and delivery services.  
 



:


hotel
hotel room ar remark easi to bug and to search whenev a kei corpor player
travel there is a chanc that spi will be listen at her heel by us transact
intellig spi determin which hotel an execut frequent onc that piec of
inform is determin the spy can set up surveil of the target room for exampl
spi frequent bribe hotel staff to allow them to enter hotel room and plant
eavesdrop devic
know where an execut is stai also make it easier to set up fix surveil of the
come and go of visitor to the hotel room or meet room for exampl the spy
can spot the target vehicl and rig it with satellit track to follow hi movement dure
a busi trip
electron and visual surveil ar not the onli spy activ conduc to the hotel
environ if a spy can gain access to an execut room whether by briberi or simpli
by find the door left open by a maid he can copi sensit file from a laptop left in the
room there mai also be sensit document in the room that the spy can photograph
trash in the room wast paper basket is also a potenti sourc of inform
if sensit document ar be deliv by a servic such as up or feder express thei
can be intercept after thei ar deliv to the hotel but befor the target ha receiv
them the spy open the envelop and copi or photograph the content the document
ar then reseal in a new deliveri envelop the invoic is remov from the plastic holder
on the origin envelop and place in the new envelop the spy affix a ship label
which is easi to gener on a desktop program and no on suspect that the messag ha
been intercept
spi can view materi deliv in a convent paper envelop without even open it
there ar special solvent call mail inspector that can be sprai on the outsid of an
envelop that allow the spy to see through the envelop and view the content insid after a
few minut the solut dri and the envelop becom opaqu again with consider
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1839
less sophist the spy can simpli resort to steam open envelop and then reseal
them after she ha read their content it is gener not difficult for a spy to bribe hotel
employe in order to gain to access the target correspond the same is true of
employe of messag and deliveri servic
