2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Transactional Intelligence


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Transactional Intelligence 
Just about any mundane business transaction can offer a potential information payoff to a 
spy. Frequent flyer miles document where an executive has traveled. Credit card receipts 
record a trip’s itinerary and goods or services purchased. Even videos purchased or rented at 
a video store are useful for documenting a targeted employee’s tastes and proclivities. Any 
one piece of information by itself has minimal value. Properly compiled, however, this 
information can provide an extensive profile on a target. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.842                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Informants 
The serious corporate spy will develop a network of paid informants who can get this 
monitoring intelligence for him. These informants come from a wide range of businesses: 
• Travel agents. 
• Airline reservation personnel. 
• Major credit card companies. 
• Staff at major Internet providers.  
• Employees at video, music, and other entertainment outlets.  
• Staff of adult entertainment providers that the target frequents. 
• Telephone company employees with access to telephone records. 
• Employees of commercial database providers such as Dialog and D&B who have access 
to transaction records. 
 
While the purpose of these informants is not to act as regular spies, they will, for a fee, 
provide transactional intelligence on a subject. That transactional information can have a 
critical impact. It can tell a corporate spy about: 
• A person’s vices. 
• Details of business travel. 
• Hotels where the target stayed and where she is likely to stay again in the future (this can 
be useful for setting up surveillance).  
• Whom the target has called. 
• Interests and hobbies (another way to edge into the target’s confidence). 
• Companies or subjects the target has researched. 
 
This type of intelligence is really a hybrid of documentary source intelligence (combining 
purely open sources and gray sources) and HUMINT. An inside contact is needed to obtain 
the information, but once the contact sells it to a corporate spy, the spy can analyze it 
without need of additional assistance. 
 
Monitoring intelligence is very helpful in the collection of human intelligence. If a spy knows 
a subject’s hobbies, she can see to it that she “m eets” the target at a restaurant, convention, 
etc., striking up a conversation or possibly a friendship. A targeted employee in this scenario 
becomes an unwitting source of information.  
 
The spy does not necessarily have to direct these efforts at an employee of the targeted 
organization. For instance, if the organization uses a contractor to microfilm its records, the 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.843 
spy might attempt to compromise an employee of the contractor or penetrate its security 
rather than attacking the target organization directly.  
 
A spy can also become his own inside source of transactional intelligence. For example, if a 
spy wants to develop a telephone history on a subject, he can send the subject a free phone 
card for 60 minutes of calling time. There are companies that will mail the phone cards to 
the subject and then track all their calls for a small fee (less than $50.00). This kind of service 
can be a powerful intelligence-gathering device. Employees should be trained to be wary of 
this kind of scam.  
 
Decoy Websites 
The Internet offers additional avenues for collecting information. One tactic used by spies is 
to set up a website to collect résumés for particular technical specialties. Included on the 
website is a questionnaire that visitors are instructed to fill out “to aid in placing you.” The 
site can also require visitors to register for “free” research services. The information that the 
applicants provide makes it possible to keep a log of the links that they access.  
 
It is not difficult to create a site that targets will visit; it is  simply a matter of doing some 
research on hot topics in a particular field. The spy creates a site that has the necessary 
metatags for search engines to pick up the title. She fills the site with relevant links and 
builds logging software into the site to track the links that users access. This can create a 
profile of the user and help the spy determine what he is interested in. The spy can even call 
users as a follow-up. The user is impressed because someone from the site took an interest 
in him, and this gives the spy a natural lead-in to pump the subject for information. 
 
A decoy website might also enable the spy to gain access to the target’s computer system. 
For instance, people frequently use the same user ID and password for a number of 
different applications because it is easier to remember than having several different 
passwords. The spy’s website might require visitors to enter a user ID and password for the 
“research services” or to view bogus job postings. This information is stored by the website 
and later used to try to gain access to the target’s computer system. Decoy websites can also 
be set up so that visitors unwittingly download viruses or other malicious software. This may 
not necessarily help a spy gain information, but it can help sabotage a company’s computer 
system.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.844                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


transact intellig
just about ani mundan busi transact can offer a potenti inform payoff to a
spy frequent flyer mile document where an execut ha travel credit card receipt
record a trip itinerari and good or servic purchas even video purchas or rent at
a video store ar us for document a target employe tast and procliv ani
on piec of inform by itself ha minim valu properli compil howev thi
inform can provid an extens profil on a target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1842 2011 fraud examin manual
inform
the seriou corpor spy will develop a network of paid inform who can get thi
monitor intellig for him these inform come from a wide rang of busi
travel agent
airlin reserv personnel
major credit card compani
staff at major internet provid
employe at video music and other entertain outlet
staff of adult entertain provid that the target frequent
telephon compani employe with access to telephon record
employe of commerci databas provid such as dialog and db who have access
to transact record
while the purpos of these inform is not to act as regular spi thei will for a fee
provid transact intellig on a subject that transact inform can have a
critic impact it can tell a corpor spy about
a person vice
detail of busi travel
hotel where the target stai and where she is like to stai again in the futur thi can
be us for set up surveil
whom the target ha call
interest and hobbi anoth wai to edg into the target confid
compani or subject the target ha research
thi type of intellig is realli a hybrid of documentari sourc intellig combin
pure open sourc and grai sourc and humint an insid contact is need to obtain
the inform but onc the contact sell it to a corpor spy the spy can analyz it
without need of addit assist
monitor intellig is veri help in the collect of human intellig if a spy know
a subject hobbi she can see to it that she m eet the target at a restaur convent
etc strike up a convers or possibl a friendship a target employe in thi scenario
becom an unwit sourc of inform
the spy doe not necessarili have to direct these effort at an employe of the target
organ for instanc if the organ us a contractor to microfilm it record the
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1843
spy might attempt to compromis an employe of the contractor or penetr it secur
rather than attack the target organ directli
a spy can also becom hi own insid sourc of transact intellig for exampl if a
spy want to develop a telephon histori on a subject he can send the subject a free phone
card for 60 minut of call time there ar compani that will mail the phone card to
the subject and then track all their call for a small fee less than 5000 thi kind of servic
can be a power intelligencegath devic employe should be train to be wari of
thi kind of scam
decoi websit
the internet offer addit avenu for collect inform on tactic us by spi is
to set up a websit to collect rsum for particular technic specialti includ on the
websit is a questionnair that visitor ar instruct to fill out to aid in place you the
site can also requir visitor to regist for free research servic the inform that the
applic provid make it possibl to keep a log of the link that thei access
it is not difficult to creat a site that target will visit it is simpli a matter of do some
research on hot topic in a particular field the spy creat a site that ha the necessari
metatag for search engin to pick up the titl she fill the site with relev link and
build log softwar into the site to track the link that user access thi can creat a
profil of the user and help the spy determin what he is interest in the spy can even call
user as a followup the user is impress becaus someon from the site took an interest
in him and thi give the spy a natur leadin to pump the subject for inform
a decoi websit might also enabl the spy to gain access to the target comput system
for instanc peopl frequent us the same user id and password for a number of
differ applic becaus it is easier to rememb than have sever differ
password the spy websit might requir visitor to enter a user id and password for the
research servic or to view bogu job post thi inform is store by the websit
and later us to try to gain access to the target comput system decoi websit can also
be set up so that visitor unwittingli download virus or other malici softwar thi mai
not necessarili help a spy gain inform but it can help sabotag a compani comput
system
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1844 2011 fraud examin manual
