2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Visual Surveillance Against People


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Visual Surveillance Against People 
 
Pre-Recruitment Surveillance 
In developing human sources, spies know that they should never underestimate the 
importance of doing pre-recruitment surveillance on targets. There are a number of goals for 
this kind of surveillance. They include: 
• To discover: 
? Who they are 
? Where they live 
? What they do in their spare time 
? What they want to keep secret  
? Who their friends are 
? Who their enemies are 
• To look for: 
? Cars 
? Homes 
? Recreational activities 
? Levels of income and debts 
? The subject’s importance to the organization 
• To uncover what they throw in the trash. For example: 
? Financial papers 
? Medical problems 
? Family problems 
• To learn about their enemies, such as:  
? Ex-lovers 
? Fired employees 
? Political opponents 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.846                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Competitors 
? People owed money 
• To make contact with the target:  
? By finding out what he thinks about his job, family, or life in general 
? By determining the degree to which the target will confide in others 
 
Briefing Files on the Subject 
Beyond the fundamentals of doing pre-recruitment surveillance, the corporate spy also must 
master regular techniques to monitor ongoing operations. These techniques begin with a 
briefing file on the intended subject. If a spy were to follow a key executive for the company, 
the following would be essential starting details: 
• Name of the subject 
• Photos of the subject 
• Detailed description 
• Known associates 
• Frequent hangouts 
• Routine activities and schedule 
• Vehicles used (with tag numbers) 
• Type of neighborhood where subject lives 
• Street or location layout 
 
Moving Surveillance 
The spy has to be flexible and imaginative in conducting a moving surveillance. For example, 
placing a reflective stripe on the back of the subject’s car makes it more distinctive at night. 
Laying a cheap wristwatch under the rear tire  of the subject’s car will establish when he 
leaves; the broken face will stop the watch at the time they depart. If a subject goes into a 
bar or restaurant, the spy knows to order food or drink and pay for it immediately so that he 
can blend in and to be ready to leave at a moment’s notice. 
 
Fixed Surveillance 
Fixed surveillance, while it has many advantages over moving surveillance, has one great 
vulnerability. The base from which the surveillance is conducted (for example, a van parked 
across the street from the subject) might be spotted by the target, as well as neighbors and 
curious passersby. In order to camouflage a fixed surveillance campaign, the spy must be 
familiar with the surroundings and choose a cover that will blend in.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.847 



:


visual surveil against peopl
prerecruit surveil
in develop human sourc spi know that thei should never underestim the
import of do prerecruit surveil on target there ar a number of goal for
thi kind of surveil thei includ
to discov
who thei ar
where thei live
what thei do in their spare time
what thei want to keep secret
who their friend ar
who their enemi ar
to look for
car
home
recreat activ
level of incom and debt
the subject import to the organ
to uncov what thei throw in the trash for exampl
financi paper
medic problem
famili problem
to learn about their enemi such as
exlov
fire employe
polit oppon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1846 2011 fraud examin manual
competitor
peopl ow monei
to make contact with the target
by find out what he think about hi job famili or life in gener
by determin the degre to which the target will confid in other
brief file on the subject
beyond the fundament of do prerecruit surveil the corpor spy also must
master regular techniqu to monitor ongo oper these techniqu begin with a
brief file on the intend subject if a spy were to follow a kei execut for the compani
the follow would be essenti start detail
name of the subject
photo of the subject
detail descript
known associ
frequent hangout
routin activ and schedul
vehicl us with tag number
type of neighborhood where subject live
street or locat layout
move surveil
the spy ha to be flexibl and imagin in conduct a move surveil for exampl
place a reflect stripe on the back of the subject car make it more distinct at night
lai a cheap wristwatch under the rear tire of the subject car will establish when he
leav the broken face will stop the watch at the time thei depart if a subject goe into a
bar or restaur the spy know to order food or drink and pai for it immedi so that he
can blend in and to be readi to leav at a moment notic
fix surveil
fix surveil while it ha mani advantag over move surveil ha on great
vulner the base from which the surveil is conduct for exampl a van park
across the street from the subject might be spot by the target as well as neighbor and
curiou passersbi in order to camouflag a fix surveil campaign the spy must be
familiar with the surround and choos a cover that will blend in
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1847
