2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/E-Mail


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


E-Mail 
E-mail is frequently dense with data on company problems, personnel issues, status on 
projects, travel plans, and merger activity. It is also the most vulnerable form of computer 
information. The vulnerability arises from the fact that almost anyone in the company has 
access to the service. Literally, everybody fr om temps to the CEO has an e-mail address. 
This wide-open access creates an immense exposure that is compounded by the desire for 
convenience. Employees in many companies are able to check their e-mail from home. 
Direct access from off-site via modem can permit compromises of the e-mail server.  
 
Once a penetration of an e-mail server occurs, whether by hacking through search engines or 
by using a legitimate account, a spy is in position to do great harm. He can forge an e-mail 
address for his account and send messages about the company requesting information. 
People will respond thinking he is from auditing, for example, when he may be just a temp 
working in customer service.  
 
An internal spy can arrange to intercept sensitive e-mail by inserting e-mail addresses into 
internal mailing lists. When proprietary or sensitive information is distributed (for example, 
to the “management” mailing list) the spy receives a copy at either an internal or an external 
e-mail site. With an external e-mail address embedded into a sensitive mailing list, it is quite 
possible that an internal spy can monitor electronic mail long after ceasing to work for the 
targeted company.  
 
E-mail security programs can detect unauthorized addresses planted into lists, so long-term 
implants are not always an effective strategy. However, when a spy knows intensive activity 
is afoot, (for example, on a merger or acquisition) short-term “taps” into e-mail lists can be 
very productive.  
 
 



:


email
email is frequent dens with data on compani problem personnel issu statu on
project travel plan and merger activ it is also the most vulner form of comput
inform the vulner aris from the fact that almost anyon in the compani ha
access to the servic liter everybodi fr om temp to the ceo ha an email address
thi wideopen access creat an immens exposur that is compound by the desir for
conveni employe in mani compani ar abl to check their email from home
direct access from offsit via modem can permit compromis of the email server
onc a penetr of an email server occur whether by hack through search engin or
by us a legitim account a spy is in posit to do great harm he can forg an email
address for hi account and send messag about the compani request inform
peopl will respond think he is from audit for exampl when he mai be just a temp
work in custom servic
an intern spy can arrang to intercept sensit email by insert email address into
intern mail list when proprietari or sensit inform is distribut for exampl
to the manag mail list the spy receiv a copi at either an intern or an extern
email site with an extern email address embed into a sensit mail list it is quit
possibl that an intern spy can monitor electron mail long after ceas to work for the
target compani
email secur program can detect unauthor address plant into list so longterm
implant ar not alwai an effect strategi howev when a spy know intens activ
is afoot for exampl on a merger or acquisit shortterm tap into email list can be
veri product
