2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Social Engineering


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Social Engineering 
In a social engineering scheme, the information thief manipulates people into handing over 
secret information through use of trickery, persuasion, threats, or cajolery. The social 
engineer usually, though not always, operates by phone or e-mail. In some cases, the social 
engineer obtains direct information from her victim about a company’s business operations, 
contracts, customer lists, or so on. In other cases, a hacker uses social engineering to obtain 
passwords or otherwise gain access to a computer system. Social engineering is thought to 
play at least some part in most computer system penetrations.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.848                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are a wide variety of social engineering techniques; the only common denominator 
being that the spy attempts to extract confidential information from an employee of the 
target company through some form of trickery or deceit. Some of the more common 
schemes are described in the following sections.  
 
The Neophyte
In one of the most common social engineering schemes, the spy calls the help desk of a 
target company and claims to be a new employee on his first day at work. The spy complains 
that he has not yet been given a password and so he has been unable to start his computer 
and begin working. The help desk employee gives the spy a password, thereby enabling him 
to enter the company’s system. Typically, the spy does not call the help desk directly in this 
type of scheme. Instead, he calls another department and asks to be transferred to the help 
desk so the call appears to be internal.  
 
The Power Broker 
In another common scheme, the attacker contacts the help desk and claims to be a high-
 ranking company official, an influential client, or some other imposing figure. Background 
searches of securities filings, government filings, company websites, or annual reports are 
used to choose the fake identity the spy will use. The spy uses his false credentials to bully 
the help desk into handing out passwords, remote-access software, or even some key piece 
of business information.  
 
The Systems Administrator  
In this scheme, an information thief contacts a computer user in an organization and claims 
to be an IT employee of the company. He tells the user that a “network problem” has been 
identified with the user’s computer. The spy asks for the password the user logged on with 
so he can fix the problem. Most employees are willing to give their password out to a 
systems administrator when requested, making this technique very effective. In a similar 
scheme, the spy will pass out a memo on customer letterhead asking users to verify their log-
 on information for “security reasons.”   
 
Fraudulent Surveys 
Fake surveys are another common social engineering scheme. Posing as survey takers, either 
in person or over the Internet, spies gather information from people about their names, 
nicknames, ages, birth dates, names and birthdays of spouses or children, pets, favorite 
hobbies, favorite song, favorite movie, and dozens of other personal preferences and 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.849 
attributes. The theory is that most people choose a password that has some level of personal 
importance. The spies take the responses from their “surveys” and try them as passwords 
when they attempt to break into a system.  
 
Fake Prizes 
Finally, fake gift certificates or sweepstakes can be used to get access to a person’s password. 
For instance, an employee of a target company is sent an e-mail gift certificate from a fake 
vendor the spy has set up. The employee might be told the gift certificate is a prize, or that it 
was purchased for them by a “secret admirer.” In any event, the employee only has to access 
the vendor’s website in order to select the me rchandise he wants to buy with his gift 
certificate. Of course, in order to make the purc hase he has to log onto a special area of the 
website, which requires a user ID and password. The spy in this scheme is betting that the 
employee will use the same user ID and password that he uses at work.  
 
Reverse Social Engineering 
Reverse social engineering creates the impression in the target’s mind that the spy is 
someone who can help them. It is actually a form of false flag recruitment. The scam can be 
perpetrated by telephone, e-mail, or regular mail. In a typical scheme, the spy poses as a 
representative of some software company. He sends a message to the target indicating that a 
software product (Product X) that the target owns has a possible defect. The target is 
instructed to call the software company (the spy) with his user ID and password in order to 
receive the fix. When the target calls, the spy obtains his access codes and then pronounces 
that his edition of the product is okay. Now the spy has access to that software product (for 
instance, a sensitive database) to use at will. 
 
Countering Social Engineering 
There are a number of security measures organizations can adopt to counteract social 
engineering schemes. While a few technical solutions may help, the majority of controls for 
this type of attack involve training employees to be aware of how social engineering works, 
the data that spies will seek, and the information that employees are allowed to disseminate.  
 
Help desk employees should be trained to ask specific, identifying questions before giving 
out any information over the phone. The organization should clearly explain the minimum 
identification requirements that callers must meet before information can be distributed. A 
two-factor authentication rule should be mandatory. If a caller fails to identify himself 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.850                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
according to the authentication rule, the person taking the call should report this incident to 
the security group as an unauthorized intrusion attempt.  
 
When information is given out, it should be harmless, boilerplate information. Passwords or 
personal identification numbers should never be distributed over the phone without 
concrete proof of the caller’s identity. References to key administrative, technical, and billing 
contacts for the corporate Internet domain should also be as anonymous as possible. If a 
company does not list its domain administrator by title, then a spy may not know exactly 
whom to impersonate when he calls the help desk. Techniques already discussed such as 
properly disposing of confidential trash will also help prevent dumpster divers from coming 
up with contact information that they can use to trick employees. 
 
Employee awareness is another key to fighting social engineering. Employees may be told 
what information to give out and what authentication factors to require, but it is another 
thing to get them to follow these procedures. One of the most effective ways to promote 
compliance with security policies is to make people aware of threats and actual instances of 
social engineering attacks. Some organizations maintain internal websites or distribute 
employee newsletters with stories about security breaches, along with prevention tips and 
information.  
 
An even more effective awareness method is to selectively test employees’ security readiness. 
For instance, security personnel should call their own organization’s help desk to see what 
information they can obtain without identifying themselves. It is also a good idea to run the 
“systems administrator” scam on employees six months after they have started, to see if they 
remember not to give out their passwords to random MIS calls. If employees give up 
information without following procedures, they should get a stern warning about their 
security responsibilities. This type of reminder will be remembered far longer than a  
training session.  
 
 



:


social engin
in a social engin scheme the inform thief manipul peopl into hand over
secret inform through us of trickeri persuas threat or cajoleri the social
engin usual though not alwai oper by phone or email in some case the social
engin obtain direct inform from her victim about a compani busi oper
contract custom list or so on in other case a hacker us social engin to obtain
password or otherwis gain access to a comput system social engin is thought to
plai at least some part in most comput system penetr
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1848 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar a wide varieti of social engin techniqu the onli common denomin
be that the spy attempt to extract confidenti inform from an employe of the
target compani through some form of trickeri or deceit some of the more common
scheme ar describ in the follow section
the neophyt
in on of the most common social engin scheme the spy call the help desk of a
target compani and claim to be a new employe on hi first dai at work the spy complain
that he ha not yet been given a password and so he ha been unabl to start hi comput
and begin work the help desk employe give the spy a password therebi enabl him
to enter the compani system typic the spy doe not call the help desk directli in thi
type of scheme instead he call anoth depart and ask to be transfer to the help
desk so the call appear to be intern
the power broker
in anoth common scheme the attack contact the help desk and claim to be a high
rank compani offici an influenti client or some other impos figur background
search of secur file govern file compani websit or annual report ar
us to choos the fake ident the spy will us the spy us hi fals credenti to bulli
the help desk into hand out password remoteaccess softwar or even some kei piec
of busi inform
the system administr
in thi scheme an inform thief contact a comput user in an organ and claim
to be an it employe of the compani he tell the user that a network problem ha been
identifi with the user comput the spy ask for the password the user log on with
so he can fix the problem most employe ar will to give their password out to a
system administr when request make thi techniqu veri effect in a similar
scheme the spy will pass out a memo on custom letterhead ask user to verifi their log
on inform for secur reason
fraudul survei
fake survei ar anoth common social engin scheme pose as survei taker either
in person or over the internet spi gather inform from peopl about their name
nicknam ag birth date name and birthdai of spous or children pet favorit
hobbi favorit song favorit movi and dozen of other person prefer and
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1849
attribut the theori is that most peopl choos a password that ha some level of person
import the spi take the respons from their survei and try them as password
when thei attempt to break into a system
fake prize
final fake gift certif or sweepstak can be us to get access to a person password
for instanc an employe of a target compani is sent an email gift certif from a fake
vendor the spy ha set up the employe might be told the gift certif is a prize or that it
wa purchas for them by a secret admir in ani event the employe onli ha to access
the vendor websit in order to select the me rchandis he want to bui with hi gift
certif of cours in order to make the purc hase he ha to log onto a special area of the
websit which requir a user id and password the spy in thi scheme is bet that the
employe will us the same user id and password that he us at work
revers social engin
revers social engin creat the impress in the target mind that the spy is
someon who can help them it is actual a form of fals flag recruit the scam can be
perpetr by telephon email or regular mail in a typic scheme the spy pose as a
repres of some softwar compani he send a messag to the target indic that a
softwar product product x that the target own ha a possibl defect the target is
instruct to call the softwar compani the spy with hi user id and password in order to
receiv the fix when the target call the spy obtain hi access code and then pronounc
that hi edit of the product is okai now the spy ha access to that softwar product for
instanc a sensit databas to us at will
counter social engin
there ar a number of secur measur organ can adopt to counteract social
engin scheme while a few technic solut mai help the major of control for
thi type of attack involv train employe to be awar of how social engin work
the data that spi will seek and the inform that employe ar allow to dissemin
help desk employe should be train to ask specif identifi question befor give
out ani inform over the phone the organ should clearli explain the minimum
identif requir that caller must meet befor inform can be distribut a
twofactor authent rule should be mandatori if a caller fail to identifi himself
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1850 2011 fraud examin manual
accord to the authent rule the person take the call should report thi incid to
the secur group as an unauthor intrus attempt
when inform is given out it should be harmless boilerpl inform password or
person identif number should never be distribut over the phone without
concret proof of the caller ident refer to kei administr technic and bill
contact for the corpor internet domain should also be as anonym as possibl if a
compani doe not list it domain administr by titl then a spy mai not know exactli
whom to imperson when he call the help desk techniqu alreadi discuss such as
properli dispos of confidenti trash will also help prevent dumpster diver from come
up with contact inform that thei can us to trick employe
employe awar is anoth kei to fight social engin employe mai be told
what inform to give out and what authent factor to requir but it is anoth
thing to get them to follow these procedur on of the most effect wai to promot
complianc with secur polici is to make peopl awar of threat and actual instanc of
social engin attack some organ maintain intern websit or distribut
employe newslett with stori about secur breach along with prevent tip and
inform
an even more effect awar method is to select test employe secur readi
for instanc secur personnel should call their own organ help desk to see what
inform thei can obtain without identifi themselv it is also a good idea to run the
system administr scam on employe six month after thei have start to see if thei
rememb not to give out their password to random mi call if employe give up
inform without follow procedur thei should get a stern warn about their
secur respons thi type of remind will be rememb far longer than a
train session
