2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Cloaking and Misdirection


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Cloaking and Misdirection 
While honesty is essential in business dealings with associates and investors, it cannot always 
be a security team’s primary strategy. In so me circumstances, misdirecting the opponent is 
essential. Rather than remaining passively behind the static defenses of security officers, 
perimeter fences, locks, and access controls, a security manager may need to create an active 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.851 
counterattack program. Such a program ensures that information thieves are as misinformed 
as possible. A misinformed opponent is a defeated one.  
 
Intelligence Needs 
Good intelligence gathering is a prelude to any successful counteroffensive against industrial 
espionage agents. If a manager does not know the opponents and their methods of attack, 
effective cloaking and misdirection will not be possible. 
 
An effective intelligence-gathering network need not employ an army of spies. Basic 
intelligence can be gathered from a variety of sources, which include print media, 
commercial databases, networking with other security managers, existing staff within the 
company, and regular security surveys of the business. This type of ongoing, low-level 
intelligence program helps identify potential and emerging security problems. Increasing the 
activity during periods of heightened threat to the business is not difficult. Because a 
preliminary intelligence system will already be in place, bringing on additional personnel and 
resources will not be overwhelming. 
 
Print Media 
Print sources should not consist of an unread mountain of journals on the manager’s desk. It 
is far more productive to subscribe to just a few professional publications that are read and 
indexed. Security Management, the National Asso ciation of Legal Investigators’ The Legal 
Investigator, and the Journal of Security Administration offer insight on the latest security 
and investigative trends. 
 
Local newspapers can provide an overview of general criminal activity relevant to the 
business, and area business journals are good sources for accounts of industrial espionage. 
The security team should also read employment ads for phony job interview schemes. 
 
Database Searches 
Computer databases are an excellent intelligence resource. Most security managers do not 
have the time to regularly read all the major national newspapers and business or technical 
magazines relevant to their client company. However, a security professional can go to the 
public library for a few hours once a month and scan magazine databases like InfoTrac for 
company references. A more efficient method is to subscribe to a clipping service, which will 
scan hundreds of articles from a variety of sources each month and provide articles 
containing any keywords (such as a company or employee name) that have been specified.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.852                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Managers may want to explore the cost/benef it trade-off of buying a modem and PC for 
their office that provides immediate access to the growing number of online resources, 
including ASISNet from the American Society for Industrial Security (www.asisonline.org) 
and a host of news databases. In scanning such databases, the security manager can run 
searches on any references to the company’s na me, officers, or products, as well as on the 
following key case topics: 
• Industrial espionage 
• Business intelligence  
• Competitor intelligence 
 
The researcher should read all online abstracts and save any articles if further details are 
required. A picture will emerge of what is available in the public domain about the company. 
The security team should then evaluate how this information could work to an information 
thief’s advantage. 
 
More and more local newspapers are becoming electronically available via the Internet or 
through libraries. The astute security manager should use this resource to check for local 
criminal trends, locate mentions of the company and its officers, and perform background 
investigations on security risks. 
 
Networking 
Networking with other security professionals should not be difficult. Local chapters of ASIS, 
fellow CFEs, investigative organizations, and former law enforcement officers’ societies 
deserve full participation. Meetings of technical societies that are relevant to the business 
may also be worthwhile. Even though these meetings may not directly address security 
issues, they provide useful intelligence about the business. For example, if a company 
manufactures chemicals, the security manager could attend the state chemical society 
meeting to learn what is being publicly discussed about her company and the industry in 
general. 
 
Existing Staffing 
An organization’s employees are often its most  neglected intelligence tool. Proper training of 
all company employees fosters the passage of vital intelligence to the security manager or 
investigator. For example, security officers can report patrol observations such as attempts 
by outsiders to search the company’s trash bins. Sales staff can identify incidents when 
strangers have tried to pump them for information at a trade show. Technical personnel 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.853 
might report overly friendly members of the opposite sex who ask too many business-related 
questions at the local watering hole. 
 
Communication with senior management is also essential. If the development of a new 
product line creates new security risks or problems, the security manager, investigator, or 
internal monitor needs to know. Efforts to protect a product prior to market release require 
the coordination of various company departments.  
 
Security Surveys  
Frequent security surveys help reveal potential weaknesses and new threats to any 
organization. They offer insight on where and how attacks might happen, and if a company 
suspects that it has already been infiltrated by a spy, a security survey can help determine 
how that infiltration could have occurred and help focus the investigation on the most 
probable techniques. These surveys provide the security professional with a chance to see 
the business through the eyes of an information thief. A perceptive security manager 
analyzes the company’s business in a creative way, looking through a spy’s eyes for pathways 
to information that might otherwise have been overlooked. If a manager wishes to deceive 
potential information thieves, security surveys can tell where the pickings for a thief are best 
and where to leave the bait.  
 
TESTING THE PERIMETER 
A security survey should begin at the perimeter of the organization. The security 
professional needs to visualize himself as a determined attacker. Do the alarm and video 
camera systems deter from entering the premises without authorization? How easy is it to 
bypass the access control systems? Can badges be obtained without much trouble through 
deception or theft? Are basic defenses (fences, lo cks, barriers, and security patrols) in place 
and in good repair? 
 
PENETRATION TECHNIQUES 
The person performing the security survey should use penetration techniques at various 
times of the day to determine when the company has the greatest degree of vulnerability. Are 
they able to easily walk into the plant on the third shift? Are vendors allowed to wander 
about the facility unescorted? Can a visitor or employee walk unchallenged out of the facility 
past guard stations carrying sensitive documents, computer disks, or a portable computer? 
Are cleaning personnel properly supervised when on-site? 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.854                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECKING FOR UNSECURED WORK AREAS 
Security personnel should also study the way employees’ work areas are maintained. Are 
sensitive documents locked up at night? Are the copy machines electronically locked down 
so a special access card is needed to use them? Do sensitive areas such as research labs and 
computer media libraries have their own separate alarm systems and access controls? Are 
filing cabinets locked at night? Does security do random patrols of the office areas and the 
plant at night? Are all persons in sensit ive areas challenged for proper credentials? 
 
PRETEXT CALLS 
Security officers can determine their organizations’ vulnerabilities to certain external threats 
by calling their own employees at work. It is important to determine what an outsider could 
learn by making pretext calls. Do employees accept what they are told over the phone at face 
value, or do they verify to whom they are talking before giving out sensitive information?   
 
TESTING PROPRIETARY LISTS AND DIRECTORIES 
It is important to make sure that proprietary lists are trapped. Audits of e-mail lists should be 
periodically conducted to ensure that no one plants unauthorized addresses. Are internal 
directories and telephone lists distributed in a secure manner? Is sensitive waste (paper and 
computer media) shredded and disposed of securely? 
 
SECURITY STAFF AWARENESS AND LINES OF COMMUNICATION 
The organization’s security force should have training in protecting proprietary information. 
If something out of the ordinary happens, do they have a means of communicating those 
incidents to management? Is an intelligence collection strategy in place? Will patrol officers 
lock up sensitive documents they find unsecured and make out a report detailing the security 
oversight? Do they know how to check for spy drops? Are they taught to observe suspicious 
activity such as an employee who always works late? 
 
EMPLOYEE SECURITY TRAINING  
It should be the goal of every corporate security office to make sure that employees are 
aware of the importance of security and are trained to protect sensitive information. What 
kind of proprietary information safeguards do employees learn? How regularly do they 
receive training? Are they encouraged to report suspicious activity? 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.855 
MULTIPLE LAYERS OF SECURITY 
There should be multiple layers of security protecting the most sensitive information. The 
layers should become progressively harder to penetrate as one gets closer to the most 
sensitive information. Does the organization have more than one layer of protection for its 
information, and is each layer effective? Or is perimeter security the only real impediment? If 
multiple layers exist, do they offer real impediments to spies, or are they minor hurdles?   
 
Cloaking Operations   
With good intelligence to identify probable channels for information thieves, a security 
manager can commence the cloaking of sensitive operations. Fluctuations in traffic offer 
industrial spies the best indirect insight into a business. Changes in the rates, deliveries, 
shipments, emissions, and the types and amounts of trash can reveal a great deal. 
 
The cost to mask these fluctuations may be significant at times. Appropriate guidance from 
senior management must be a factor in computing the cost-benefit trade-off. If the risks to a 
product line outweigh the security costs, the security staff should begin a cloaking program.  
 
Trash and Waste Disposal 
Trash and waste disposal are excellent places to start. Adding a consistent amount of 
shredded, non-sensitive paper to sensitive document waste greatly diminishes the chance of 
traffic analysis. Non-documentary waste should be secured in a locked holding area. From 
there, it can be sorted into uniform shipment modules before release to the waste disposal 
vendor. When the contents of waste shipments are fairly uniform, deciphering plant 
operations from them becomes much more difficult. 
 
Deliveries and Shipments 
Deliveries and shipments should be made on as uniform a schedule as possible. Ideally, 
organizations should avoid scheduling major deliveries just before a product manufacturing 
run. This is just the sort of tip-off corporate spies are looking for. Maintaining adequate 
inventory levels can go a long way toward eliminating this problem. 
 
If the manufacturing process dictates tight parts delivery schedules, the use of a common 
carrier will at least mask the identity of the supplier to external surveillance. Utilizing a mix 
of common carriers and company trucks helps cloak shipments. Company drivers should be 
trained to vary their schedules and delivery routes. They should also be instructed to report 
any suspicions of intelligence gathering operations. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.856                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hours of Operation and Power Consumption 
During highly sensitive manufacturing, testing, or research operations, the hours of 
operation and levels of power consumption should be kept as uniform as possible. Lights 
can be left on continuously, and some kind of around-the-clock activity can be maintained to 
mask sensitive operations.  
 
Emissions 
If the heightened activity during a crisis period will result in additional smoke or steam 
emissions, the change should be made as gradually as possible. The key is to avoid creating 
an unusual pattern of activity. Management should ease the company into any critical period 
of operations to avoid drawing the attention of the outside world. Similarly, it should ease 
out of the critical period when it is over. 
 
Food Deliveries 
If significant numbers of employees need to work unusual hours in a crisis period, the 
company should provide food service for them from the company’s cafeteria. Increased 
food deliveries to the site can indicate that something out of the ordinary is going on.  
 
Computer Emanations 
If increased computer use creates unusual traffic in emanations, the company can start 
masking it early with a buildup of non-sensitive processing. In addition, appropriate 
shielding will cut down on emanations whenever feasible. 
 
Travel Plans 
Travel by key executives and technical staff offers useful intelligence information to a spy. 
During periods of intense financial activity such as a possible acquisition or merger, meetings 
can be scheduled at neutral locations with short notice to any outside parties, such as hotels, 
travel agents, and rental car agencies. 
 
Use the names of low-profile employees or businesses when booking rooms and travel 
arrangements. Group travel by key executives should be minimized, and the company should 
be sure to stagger the arrival and departure of senior managers at the neutral site. Executives 
should be briefed not to discuss sensitive matters in their hotel rooms or on the telephones 
in those rooms. When feasible, security should be present in the executive’s room when the 
executive is out. If not feasible, the executives should be trained not to leave sensitive 
information unattended in their rooms.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.857 
Technical staff members traveling to research centers or facilities for fact-finding purposes 
should mix in some non-sensitive stops on their itinerary. The additional destinations will 
confuse onlookers in case of possible surveillance. Stops at technical or research libraries to 
do some non-sensitive personal research can leave a spy unsure about which facility on the 
trip was actually important. 
 
Misdirection   
Attempts to compromise employees or information controls demand an immediate 
response. The question is whether to simply shore up security or use the situation to 
misdirect the opposition. Misdirection involves feeding information thieves false facts in 
order to neutralize their intelligence efforts. 
 
Careful guidance from senior management will be necessary. If misdirection is determined to 
be the best way to protect the organization, the false facts that are released must not come 
back to hurt the company, its officers, its stockholders, or its investors. 
 
Assuming that a misdirection policy is approved and carefully crafted, it might work as 
follows. Suppose security has detected an employment advertisement that appears designed 
to lure technical staff to phony interviews so they can be pumped for information. Security 
can go on the offensive to counter this threat by sending technical staff members with 
business intelligence training as decoys. Their goal is to give an impressive technical 
interview that sends the opponent following dead end leads. At the same time, the decoy is 
able to gather intelligence on what the industrial spies are after. This type of information 
strengthens defenses at the target company. 
 
At trade fairs, conventions, and technical meetings, employees should have a prepared story 
to tell industrial spies. When confronted with camouflaged questioning about an industrial 
process, employees can relate information that sounds convincing but that actually leads the 
opposition astray. Again, such misinformation must be sufficiently technical in nature so its 
general release to the public would not damage the company.  
 
Spotting False Suitors 
A tactic sometimes utilized by business intelligence professionals is to initiate false 
negotiations for the purchase of services, product lines, or portions of the target company. 
During the course of the negotiations, the spy attempts to gain valuable information about 
the target, its cost structure, production schedule, manufacturing processes, etc. Other 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.858                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
similar tactics that have already been discussed include spies posing as headhunters, 
conducting false employment interviews to gather information, and posing as a potential 
customer through the use of bogus requests for proposal.  
 
Management and employees should be trained to spot these schemes. False inquiries by 
purchasers can be terminated quickly if organizations require interested parties to 
demonstrate financial qualifications before commencing with any high-level negotiations. 
Financial statements of the suitor should be verified. Similarly, before replying to any RFP, it 
goes without saying that an organization should verify the existence and interest of the 
company seeking proposals. This can be easily accomplished by simply looking up the 
company in the phone book or traveling to its physical address to verify that the company 
exists. A search of state and county records can also be conducted to determine if the 
company is legally registered. Another simple technique is to contact others in the relevant 
industry to see if they have heard of the suitor company. In cases where a spy is posing as a 
representative of an existing company, a phone call to this company to verify the 
information in the RFP will help ensure that the request is legitimate. If evidence suggests 
that the party or company is a false front, security can again take the opportunity to provide 
misleading information to the potential information thieves.  
 
If employees are approached by companies interested in hiring them, similar steps should be 
taken to ensure that these suitors are not actually corporate spies fishing for information. 
Employees should be trained to report suspicious offers by outsiders. Of course, it is 
unrealistic to expect employees to report every job offer they receive or every employment 
interview they take. What organizations can do is train their employees—particularly those in 
possession of key information—to be wary of the deception tactics spies use. It is a good 
idea to explain to key personnel how these schemes are generally initiated, and what 
information the spy will be trying to obtain. Hopefully, this will help employees spot phony 
suitors and report them before any meetings or bogus interviews are conducted. In the 
alternative, employees may at least be wary of suspicious questions during bogus interviews 
and know enough not to divulge sensitive information.  
 
In addition to training key employees to spot deception techniques, it may be advantageous 
to train these employees in some of the simple methods they can use to determine if a suitor 
is legitimate, such as verifying its phone number or address, contacting others in the 
industry, or simply calling the company’s number in the phone book (if one is listed) to 
verify the time of an interview. These are steps that employees can take without having to 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.859 
tell their employer about outside job offers, and which might uncover a corporate espionage 
campaign.  
 
Vendors and Suppliers 
Secondary interviewing of suppliers and vendors by corporate spies poses a problem. A 
company rarely has direct control over what its suppliers and vendors tell third parties. So 
suppliers and vendors should be given information on a need-to-know basis only. 
 
Proper training of purchasing agents is also helpful. Suppliers of highly critical components 
or services need to be signatories to nondisclosure agreements. If intelligence reveals a 
supplier to be a major leak, the short-term answer may be sending misinformation through 
that supplier. The long-term solution would be termination, legal action, or both. 
 
Technical Articles and Publications  
Articles published by technical staff can create cavernous holes in an information security 
program. Staff may unintentionally leak sensitive information as part of an innocent 
academic exchange. The same is true for public speaking engagements. A policy of pre-
 publication review by security personnel and technical management is an absolute must.  
 
While pre-publication reviews of articles and speeches are certainly appropriate, 
organizations should not use technical articles and speeches as a method for disseminating 
misinformation. There are other means for conducting a counterespionage campaign that 
trammel less on issues such as freedom of expression, the right to academic inquiry, and the 
right to be fairly informed.  
 
Consultants 
Consultants can be a source of leaks, and their access to confidential or sensitive information 
should therefore be kept on a need-to-know status. Their activities should be 
compartmentalized as much as possible. As with vendors and suppliers, consultants can be 
fed misinformation if they are suspected of leaking data to a competitor.  
 
If highly sensitive information must be discussed with a consultant, it may be advisable to 
place the discussions in a context that limits the consultant’s knowledge of inside 
information. For example, an expert can tell you what the melting point of a semiconductor 
material is, but they do not necessarily need to know why you need to know that 
information. Obviously, the need to pro tect information must be weighed against the 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.860                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business need of consultants to have access to information and a free flow of ideas in order 
to be able to perform their work effectively.  
 
Dealing with Employees Who Are Leaving 
Technical employees who give notice that they are leaving their jobs while working on highly 
sensitive projects should be transferred to non-sensitive projects until their termination date. 
All employees (as well as vendors, contractors, consultants, temporary help, etc.) should be 
required to sign nondisclosure agreements at the time of their hiring. When employees are 
leaving an organization, they should be reminded of their obligation to protect the 
organization’s secrets, even after their employment  ends. It is a good idea to have employees 
sign a statement at their exit interviews in which they affirm that they understand and will 
comply with the terms of the nondisclosure agreements they have signed.  
 
If reliable intelligence reveals that an employee intends to sell the organization’s proprietary 
information, placing misleading information in his hands may dilute some of the impact. 
Planting technical gossip in the company lunchroom, for example, may be an effective 
method for misinforming an employee.  
 
Hackers
If hackers or information thieves penetrate the computer system, security should give them 
something to munch on. The idea is to place worthless, highly technical sounding files on 
the company’s system. If someone signs on from an off-site location and starts to download 
one of these files, security is notified and an investigation begins. 
 
The same tactic applies to PCs. Sensitive data should be placed on disks and locked in a safe 
when not in use. Bogus files containing misinformation can be left on the hard drive for 
prying eyes. If a security manager really wants spies to take the bait, she can add password 
protection to the system to protect the bogus files. The fact that the files are protected helps 
convince potential thieves that they contain valuable information. The same idea works for a 
computer sent out for repair. Placing bogus data on the hard drive prevents service 
technicians from stealing and selling actual company trade secrets. 
 
Another twist on the same theme is to place documents and computer auxiliary items 
containing bogus data in the trash. Auxiliary items include old disks and CDs, old magnetic 
tapes, used computer paper, and other media. This technique is an excellent method for 
managing information thieves who like to go dumpster diving.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.861 
If an employee is suspected of stealing computer files, that individual should be assigned a 
computer with a honey pot of bogus technical information. If the information shows up in 
the public sector, security will know who is leaking the information. 
 
 



:


cloak and misdirect
while honesti is essenti in busi deal with associ and investor it cannot alwai
be a secur team primari strategi in so me circumst misdirect the oppon is
essenti rather than remain passiv behind the static defens of secur offic
perimet fenc lock and access control a secur manag mai need to creat an activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1851
counterattack program such a program ensur that inform thiev ar as misinform
as possibl a misinform oppon is a defeat on
intellig need
good intellig gather is a prelud to ani success counteroffens against industri
espionag agent if a manag doe not know the oppon and their method of attack
effect cloak and misdirect will not be possibl
an effect intelligencegath network need not emploi an armi of spi basic
intellig can be gather from a varieti of sourc which includ print media
commerci databas network with other secur manag exist staff within the
compani and regular secur survei of the busi thi type of ongo lowlevel
intellig program help identifi potenti and emerg secur problem increas the
activ dure period of heighten threat to the busi is not difficult becaus a
preliminari intellig system will alreadi be in place bring on addit personnel and
resourc will not be overwhelm
print media
print sourc should not consist of an unread mountain of journal on the manag desk it
is far more product to subscrib to just a few profession public that ar read and
index secur manag the nation asso ciation of legal investig the legal
investig and the journal of secur administr offer insight on the latest secur
and investig trend
local newspap can provid an overview of gener crimin activ relev to the
busi and area busi journal ar good sourc for account of industri espionag
the secur team should also read employ ad for phoni job interview scheme
databas search
comput databas ar an excel intellig resourc most secur manag do not
have the time to regularli read all the major nation newspap and busi or technic
magazin relev to their client compani howev a secur profession can go to the
public librari for a few hour onc a month and scan magazin databas like infotrac for
compani refer a more effici method is to subscrib to a clip servic which will
scan hundr of articl from a varieti of sourc each month and provid articl
contain ani keyword such as a compani or employe name that have been specifi
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1852 2011 fraud examin manual
manag mai want to explor the costbenef it tradeoff of bui a modem and pc for
their offic that provid immedi access to the grow number of onlin resourc
includ asisnet from the american societi for industri secur wwwasisonlineorg
and a host of new databas in scan such databas the secur manag can run
search on ani refer to the compani na me offic or product as well as on the
follow kei case topic
industri espionag
busi intellig
competitor intellig
the research should read all onlin abstract and save ani articl if further detail ar
requir a pictur will emerg of what is avail in the public domain about the compani
the secur team should then evalu how thi inform could work to an inform
thief advantag
more and more local newspap ar becom electron avail via the internet or
through librari the astut secur manag should us thi resourc to check for local
crimin trend locat mention of the compani and it offic and perform background
investig on secur risk
network
network with other secur profession should not be difficult local chapter of asi
fellow cfe investig organ and former law enforc offic societi
deserv full particip meet of technic societi that ar relev to the busi
mai also be worthwhil even though these meet mai not directli address secur
issu thei provid us intellig about the busi for exampl if a compani
manufactur chemic the secur manag could attend the state chemic societi
meet to learn what is be publicli discuss about her compani and the industri in
gener
exist staf
an organ employe ar often it most neglect intellig tool proper train of
all compani employe foster the passag of vital intellig to the secur manag or
investig for exampl secur offic can report patrol observ such as attempt
by outsid to search the compani trash bin sale staff can identifi incid when
stranger have tri to pump them for inform at a trade show technic personnel
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1853
might report overli friendli member of the opposit sex who ask too mani businessrel
question at the local water hole
commun with senior manag is also essenti if the develop of a new
product line creat new secur risk or problem the secur manag investig or
intern monitor need to know effort to protect a product prior to market releas requir
the coordin of variou compani depart
secur survei
frequent secur survei help reveal potenti weak and new threat to ani
organ thei offer insight on where and how attack might happen and if a compani
suspect that it ha alreadi been infiltr by a spy a secur survei can help determin
how that infiltr could have occur and help focu the investig on the most
probabl techniqu these survei provid the secur profession with a chanc to see
the busi through the ey of an inform thief a percept secur manag
analyz the compani busi in a creativ wai look through a spy ey for pathwai
to inform that might otherwis have been overlook if a manag wish to deceiv
potenti inform thiev secur survei can tell where the pick for a thief ar best
and where to leav the bait
test the perimet
a secur survei should begin at the perimet of the organ the secur
profession need to visual himself as a determin attack do the alarm and video
camera system deter from enter the premis without author how easi is it to
bypass the access control system can badg be obtain without much troubl through
decept or theft ar basic defens fenc lo ck barrier and secur patrol in place
and in good repair
penetr techniqu
the person perform the secur survei should us penetr techniqu at variou
time of the dai to determin when the compani ha the greatest degre of vulner ar
thei abl to easili walk into the plant on the third shift ar vendor allow to wander
about the facil unescort can a visitor or employe walk unchalleng out of the facil
past guard station carri sensit document comput disk or a portabl comput
ar clean personnel properli supervis when onsit
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1854 2011 fraud examin manual
check for unsecur work area
secur personnel should also studi the wai employe work area ar maintain ar
sensit document lock up at night ar the copi machin electron lock down
so a special access card is need to us them do sensit area such as research lab and
comput media librari have their own separ alarm system and access control ar
file cabinet lock at night doe secur do random patrol of the offic area and the
plant at night ar all person in sensit iv area challeng for proper credenti
pretext call
secur offic can determin their organ vulner to certain extern threat
by call their own employe at work it is import to determin what an outsid could
learn by make pretext call do employe accept what thei ar told over the phone at face
valu or do thei verifi to whom thei ar talk befor give out sensit inform
test proprietari list and directori
it is import to make sure that proprietari list ar trap audit of email list should be
period conduct to ensur that no on plant unauthor address ar intern
directori and telephon list distribut in a secur manner is sensit wast paper and
comput media shred and dispos of secur
secur staff awar and line of commun
the organ secur forc should have train in protect proprietari inform
if someth out of the ordinari happen do thei have a mean of commun those
incid to manag is an intellig collect strategi in place will patrol offic
lock up sensit document thei find unsecur and make out a report detail the secur
oversight do thei know how to check for spy drop ar thei taught to observ suspici
activ such as an employe who alwai work late
employe secur train
it should be the goal of everi corpor secur offic to make sure that employe ar
awar of the import of secur and ar train to protect sensit inform what
kind of proprietari inform safeguard do employe learn how regularli do thei
receiv train ar thei encourag to report suspici activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1855
multipl layer of secur
there should be multipl layer of secur protect the most sensit inform the
layer should becom progress harder to penetr as on get closer to the most
sensit inform doe the organ have more than on layer of protect for it
inform and is each layer effect or is perimet secur the onli real impedi if
multipl layer exist do thei offer real impedi to spi or ar thei minor hurdl
cloak oper
with good intellig to identifi probabl channel for inform thiev a secur
manag can commenc the cloak of sensit oper fluctuat in traffic offer
industri spi the best indirect insight into a busi chang in the rate deliveri
shipment emiss and the type and amount of trash can reveal a great deal
the cost to mask these fluctuat mai be signific at time appropri guidanc from
senior manag must be a factor in comput the costbenefit tradeoff if the risk to a
product line outweigh the secur cost the secur staff should begin a cloak program
trash and wast dispos
trash and wast dispos ar excel place to start ad a consist amount of
shred nonsensit paper to sensit document wast greatli diminish the chanc of
traffic analysi nondocumentari wast should be secur in a lock hold area from
there it can be sort into uniform shipment modul befor releas to the wast dispos
vendor when the content of wast shipment ar fairli uniform deciph plant
oper from them becom much more difficult
deliveri and shipment
deliveri and shipment should be made on as uniform a schedul as possibl ideal
organ should avoid schedul major deliveri just befor a product manufactur
run thi is just the sort of tipoff corpor spi ar look for maintain adequ
inventori level can go a long wai toward elimin thi problem
if the manufactur process dictat tight part deliveri schedul the us of a common
carrier will at least mask the ident of the supplier to extern surveil util a mix
of common carrier and compani truck help cloak shipment compani driver should be
train to vari their schedul and deliveri rout thei should also be instruct to report
ani suspicion of intellig gather oper
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1856 2011 fraud examin manual
hour of oper and power consumpt
dure highli sensit manufactur test or research oper the hour of
oper and level of power consumpt should be kept as uniform as possibl light
can be left on continu and some kind of aroundtheclock activ can be maintain to
mask sensit oper
emiss
if the heighten activ dure a crisi period will result in addit smoke or steam
emiss the chang should be made as gradual as possibl the kei is to avoid creat
an unusu pattern of activ manag should eas the compani into ani critic period
of oper to avoid draw the attent of the outsid world similarli it should eas
out of the critic period when it is over
food deliveri
if signific number of employe need to work unusu hour in a crisi period the
compani should provid food servic for them from the compani cafeteria increas
food deliveri to the site can indic that someth out of the ordinari is go on
comput eman
if increas comput us creat unusu traffic in eman the compani can start
mask it earli with a buildup of nonsensit process in addit appropri
shield will cut down on eman whenev feasibl
travel plan
travel by kei execut and technic staff offer us intellig inform to a spy
dure period of intens financi activ such as a possibl acquisit or merger meet
can be schedul at neutral locat with short notic to ani outsid parti such as hotel
travel agent and rental car agenc
us the name of lowprofil employe or busi when book room and travel
arrang group travel by kei execut should be minim and the compani should
be sure to stagger the arriv and departur of senior manag at the neutral site execut
should be brief not to discuss sensit matter in their hotel room or on the telephon
in those room when feasibl secur should be present in the execut room when the
execut is out if not feasibl the execut should be train not to leav sensit
inform unattend in their room
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1857
technic staff member travel to research center or facil for factfind purpos
should mix in some nonsensit stop on their itinerari the addit destin will
confus onlook in case of possibl surveil stop at technic or research librari to
do some nonsensit person research can leav a spy unsur about which facil on the
trip wa actual import
misdirect
attempt to compromis employe or inform control demand an immedi
respons the question is whether to simpli shore up secur or us the situat to
misdirect the opposit misdirect involv feed inform thiev fals fact in
order to neutral their intellig effort
care guidanc from senior manag will be necessari if misdirect is determin to
be the best wai to protect the organ the fals fact that ar releas must not come
back to hurt the compani it offic it stockhold or it investor
assum that a misdirect polici is approv and carefulli craft it might work as
follow suppos secur ha detect an employ advertis that appear design
to lure technic staff to phoni interview so thei can be pump for inform secur
can go on the offens to counter thi threat by send technic staff member with
busi intellig train as decoi their goal is to give an impress technic
interview that send the oppon follow dead end lead at the same time the decoi is
abl to gather intellig on what the industri spi ar after thi type of inform
strengthen defens at the target compani
at trade fair convent and technic meet employe should have a prepar stori
to tell industri spi when confront with camouflag question about an industri
process employe can relat inform that sound convinc but that actual lead the
opposit astrai again such misinform must be suffici technic in natur so it
gener releas to the public would not damag the compani
spot fals suitor
a tactic sometim util by busi intellig profession is to initi fals
negoti for the purchas of servic product line or portion of the target compani
dure the cours of the negoti the spy attempt to gain valuabl inform about
the target it cost structur product schedul manufactur process etc other
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1858 2011 fraud examin manual
similar tactic that have alreadi been discuss includ spi pose as headhunt
conduct fals employ interview to gather inform and pose as a potenti
custom through the us of bogu request for propos
manag and employe should be train to spot these scheme fals inquiri by
purchas can be termin quickli if organ requir interest parti to
demonstr financi qualif befor commenc with ani highlevel negoti
financi statement of the suitor should be verifi similarli befor repli to ani rfp it
goe without sai that an organ should verifi the exist and interest of the
compani seek propos thi can be easili accomplish by simpli look up the
compani in the phone book or travel to it physic address to verifi that the compani
exist a search of state and counti record can also be conduct to determin if the
compani is legal regist anoth simpl techniqu is to contact other in the relev
industri to see if thei have heard of the suitor compani in case where a spy is pose as a
repres of an exist compani a phone call to thi compani to verifi the
inform in the rfp will help ensur that the request is legitim if evid suggest
that the parti or compani is a fals front secur can again take the opportun to provid
mislead inform to the potenti inform thiev
if employe ar approach by compani interest in hire them similar step should be
taken to ensur that these suitor ar not actual corpor spi fish for inform
employe should be train to report suspici offer by outsid of cours it is
unrealist to expect employe to report everi job offer thei receiv or everi employ
interview thei take what organ can do is train their employeesparticularli those in
possess of kei informationto be wari of the decept tactic spi us it is a good
idea to explain to kei personnel how these scheme ar gener initi and what
inform the spy will be try to obtain hopefulli thi will help employe spot phoni
suitor and report them befor ani meet or bogu interview ar conduct in the
altern employe mai at least be wari of suspici question dure bogu interview
and know enough not to divulg sensit inform
in addit to train kei employe to spot decept techniqu it mai be advantag
to train these employe in some of the simpl method thei can us to determin if a suitor
is legitim such as verifi it phone number or address contact other in the
industri or simpli call the compani number in the phone book if on is list to
verifi the time of an interview these ar step that employe can take without have to
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1859
tell their employ about outsid job offer and which might uncov a corpor espionag
campaign
vendor and supplier
secondari interview of supplier and vendor by corpor spi pose a problem a
compani rare ha direct control over what it supplier and vendor tell third parti so
supplier and vendor should be given inform on a needtoknow basi onli
proper train of purchas agent is also help supplier of highli critic compon
or servic need to be signatori to nondisclosur agreement if intellig reveal a
supplier to be a major leak the shortterm answer mai be send misinform through
that supplier the longterm solut would be termin legal action or both
technic articl and public
articl publish by technic staff can creat cavern hole in an inform secur
program staff mai unintention leak sensit inform as part of an innoc
academ exchang the same is true for public speak engag a polici of pre
public review by secur personnel and technic manag is an absolut must
while prepubl review of articl and speech ar certainli appropri
organ should not us technic articl and speech as a method for dissemin
misinform there ar other mean for conduct a counterespionag campaign that
trammel less on issu such as freedom of express the right to academ inquiri and the
right to be fairli inform
consult
consult can be a sourc of leak and their access to confidenti or sensit inform
should therefor be kept on a needtoknow statu their activ should be
compartment as much as possibl as with vendor and supplier consult can be
fed misinform if thei ar suspect of leak data to a competitor
if highli sensit inform must be discuss with a consult it mai be advis to
place the discuss in a context that limit the consult knowledg of insid
inform for exampl an expert can tell you what the melt point of a semiconductor
materi is but thei do not necessarili need to know why you need to know that
inform obvious the need to pro tect inform must be weigh against the
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1860 2011 fraud examin manual
busi need of consult to have access to inform and a free flow of idea in order
to be abl to perform their work effect
deal with employe who ar leav
technic employe who give notic that thei ar leav their job while work on highli
sensit project should be transfer to nonsensit project until their termin date
all employe as well as vendor contractor consult temporari help etc should be
requir to sign nondisclosur agreement at the time of their hire when employe ar
leav an organ thei should be remind of their oblig to protect the
organ secret even after their employ end it is a good idea to have employe
sign a statement at their exit interview in which thei affirm that thei understand and will
compli with the term of the nondisclosur agreement thei have sign
if reliabl intellig reveal that an employe intend to sell the organ proprietari
inform place mislead inform in hi hand mai dilut some of the impact
plant technic gossip in the compani lunchroom for exampl mai be an effect
method for misinform an employe
hacker
if hacker or inform thiev penetr the comput system secur should give them
someth to munch on the idea is to place worthless highli technic sound file on
the compani system if someon sign on from an offsit locat and start to download
on of these file secur is notifi and an investig begin
the same tactic appli to pc sensit data should be place on disk and lock in a safe
when not in us bogu file contain misinform can be left on the hard drive for
pry ey if a secur manag realli want spi to take the bait she can add password
protect to the system to protect the bogu file the fact that the file ar protect help
convinc potenti thiev that thei contain valuabl inform the same idea work for a
comput sent out for repair place bogu data on the hard drive prevent servic
technician from steal and sell actual compani trade secret
anoth twist on the same theme is to place document and comput auxiliari item
contain bogu data in the trash auxiliari item includ old disk and cd old magnet
tape us comput paper and other media thi techniqu is an excel method for
manag inform thiev who like to go dumpster dive
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1861
if an employe is suspect of steal comput file that individu should be assign a
comput with a honei pot of bogu technic inform if the inform show up in
the public sector secur will know who is leak the inform
