2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Cloaking and Misdirection/Security Surveys


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Security Surveys  
Frequent security surveys help reveal potential weaknesses and new threats to any 
organization. They offer insight on where and how attacks might happen, and if a company 
suspects that it has already been infiltrated by a spy, a security survey can help determine 
how that infiltration could have occurred and help focus the investigation on the most 
probable techniques. These surveys provide the security professional with a chance to see 
the business through the eyes of an information thief. A perceptive security manager 
analyzes the company’s business in a creative way, looking through a spy’s eyes for pathways 
to information that might otherwise have been overlooked. If a manager wishes to deceive 
potential information thieves, security surveys can tell where the pickings for a thief are best 
and where to leave the bait.  
 
TESTING THE PERIMETER 
A security survey should begin at the perimeter of the organization. The security 
professional needs to visualize himself as a determined attacker. Do the alarm and video 
camera systems deter from entering the premises without authorization? How easy is it to 
bypass the access control systems? Can badges be obtained without much trouble through 
deception or theft? Are basic defenses (fences, lo cks, barriers, and security patrols) in place 
and in good repair? 
 
PENETRATION TECHNIQUES 
The person performing the security survey should use penetration techniques at various 
times of the day to determine when the company has the greatest degree of vulnerability. Are 
they able to easily walk into the plant on the third shift? Are vendors allowed to wander 
about the facility unescorted? Can a visitor or employee walk unchallenged out of the facility 
past guard stations carrying sensitive documents, computer disks, or a portable computer? 
Are cleaning personnel properly supervised when on-site? 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.854                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECKING FOR UNSECURED WORK AREAS 
Security personnel should also study the way employees’ work areas are maintained. Are 
sensitive documents locked up at night? Are the copy machines electronically locked down 
so a special access card is needed to use them? Do sensitive areas such as research labs and 
computer media libraries have their own separate alarm systems and access controls? Are 
filing cabinets locked at night? Does security do random patrols of the office areas and the 
plant at night? Are all persons in sensit ive areas challenged for proper credentials? 
 
PRETEXT CALLS 
Security officers can determine their organizations’ vulnerabilities to certain external threats 
by calling their own employees at work. It is important to determine what an outsider could 
learn by making pretext calls. Do employees accept what they are told over the phone at face 
value, or do they verify to whom they are talking before giving out sensitive information?   
 
TESTING PROPRIETARY LISTS AND DIRECTORIES 
It is important to make sure that proprietary lists are trapped. Audits of e-mail lists should be 
periodically conducted to ensure that no one plants unauthorized addresses. Are internal 
directories and telephone lists distributed in a secure manner? Is sensitive waste (paper and 
computer media) shredded and disposed of securely? 
 
SECURITY STAFF AWARENESS AND LINES OF COMMUNICATION 
The organization’s security force should have training in protecting proprietary information. 
If something out of the ordinary happens, do they have a means of communicating those 
incidents to management? Is an intelligence collection strategy in place? Will patrol officers 
lock up sensitive documents they find unsecured and make out a report detailing the security 
oversight? Do they know how to check for spy drops? Are they taught to observe suspicious 
activity such as an employee who always works late? 
 
EMPLOYEE SECURITY TRAINING  
It should be the goal of every corporate security office to make sure that employees are 
aware of the importance of security and are trained to protect sensitive information. What 
kind of proprietary information safeguards do employees learn? How regularly do they 
receive training? Are they encouraged to report suspicious activity? 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.855 
MULTIPLE LAYERS OF SECURITY 
There should be multiple layers of security protecting the most sensitive information. The 
layers should become progressively harder to penetrate as one gets closer to the most 
sensitive information. Does the organization have more than one layer of protection for its 
information, and is each layer effective? Or is perimeter security the only real impediment? If 
multiple layers exist, do they offer real impediments to spies, or are they minor hurdles?   
 



:


secur survei
frequent secur survei help reveal potenti weak and new threat to ani
organ thei offer insight on where and how attack might happen and if a compani
suspect that it ha alreadi been infiltr by a spy a secur survei can help determin
how that infiltr could have occur and help focu the investig on the most
probabl techniqu these survei provid the secur profession with a chanc to see
the busi through the ey of an inform thief a percept secur manag
analyz the compani busi in a creativ wai look through a spy ey for pathwai
to inform that might otherwis have been overlook if a manag wish to deceiv
potenti inform thiev secur survei can tell where the pick for a thief ar best
and where to leav the bait
test the perimet
a secur survei should begin at the perimet of the organ the secur
profession need to visual himself as a determin attack do the alarm and video
camera system deter from enter the premis without author how easi is it to
bypass the access control system can badg be obtain without much troubl through
decept or theft ar basic defens fenc lo ck barrier and secur patrol in place
and in good repair
penetr techniqu
the person perform the secur survei should us penetr techniqu at variou
time of the dai to determin when the compani ha the greatest degre of vulner ar
thei abl to easili walk into the plant on the third shift ar vendor allow to wander
about the facil unescort can a visitor or employe walk unchalleng out of the facil
past guard station carri sensit document comput disk or a portabl comput
ar clean personnel properli supervis when onsit
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1854 2011 fraud examin manual
check for unsecur work area
secur personnel should also studi the wai employe work area ar maintain ar
sensit document lock up at night ar the copi machin electron lock down
so a special access card is need to us them do sensit area such as research lab and
comput media librari have their own separ alarm system and access control ar
file cabinet lock at night doe secur do random patrol of the offic area and the
plant at night ar all person in sensit iv area challeng for proper credenti
pretext call
secur offic can determin their organ vulner to certain extern threat
by call their own employe at work it is import to determin what an outsid could
learn by make pretext call do employe accept what thei ar told over the phone at face
valu or do thei verifi to whom thei ar talk befor give out sensit inform
test proprietari list and directori
it is import to make sure that proprietari list ar trap audit of email list should be
period conduct to ensur that no on plant unauthor address ar intern
directori and telephon list distribut in a secur manner is sensit wast paper and
comput media shred and dispos of secur
secur staff awar and line of commun
the organ secur forc should have train in protect proprietari inform
if someth out of the ordinari happen do thei have a mean of commun those
incid to manag is an intellig collect strategi in place will patrol offic
lock up sensit document thei find unsecur and make out a report detail the secur
oversight do thei know how to check for spy drop ar thei taught to observ suspici
activ such as an employe who alwai work late
employe secur train
it should be the goal of everi corpor secur offic to make sure that employe ar
awar of the import of secur and ar train to protect sensit inform what
kind of proprietari inform safeguard do employe learn how regularli do thei
receiv train ar thei encourag to report suspici activ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1855
multipl layer of secur
there should be multipl layer of secur protect the most sensit inform the
layer should becom progress harder to penetr as on get closer to the most
sensit inform doe the organ have more than on layer of protect for it
inform and is each layer effect or is perimet secur the onli real impedi if
multipl layer exist do thei offer real impedi to spi or ar thei minor hurdl
