2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Technical Surveillance 
The popular image of the spy, at least as portrayed on television and in the movies, is very 
often associated with all sorts of high-tech gadgets: everything from miniature cameras to 
exotic listening devices to radio wristwatches and telephones hidden in shoes. Obviously, 
many of these devices are fanciful and, while they may provide interesting entertainment, 
they are far removed from the real world of corporate espionage. 
 
Corporate spies do, however, employ various forms of technological surveillance equipment, 
the tools varying according to the needs of the job at hand. In general, corporate spies only 
resort to using high-tech equipment when simpler means are not available to accomplish the 
task. In some cases a miniature camera might be called for to copy sensitive documents, but 
not when a nearby copy machine can be used to achieve the same result. In other instances a 
wiretap may be needed, but only when there is no other means to monitor a subject’s 
communications. Sometimes satellite tracking of motor vehicles becomes necessary, but not 
when simple visual surveillance will tell the spy where the subject has traveled. In other 
words, corporate spies that know what they are doing do not employ technology for the sake 
of using fancy gadgets.  
 
When spies do resort to the use of technical surveillance equipment, it is usually to gather 
nondocumentary evidence, or information that cannot be found through open sources or in 
the target’s files. The methods that spies employ to gather nondocumentary information 
include: (1) taking photographs, (2) conducting surveillance and visual sightings, (3) listening 
to conversations, (4) monitoring computers and computer communications, (5) analyzing 
traffic at a plant, and (6) monitoring emanations from computers and telecommunications 
equipment. 
 
Nondocumentary information has certain advantages. It captures changes over time 
(photographs taken at different times) or processes as they occur (videotaping). Electronic 
surveillance can provide the spy with information that would take many hours of 
documentary analysis to acquire. Aerial photography provides a broad perspective on the 
manufacturing physical plant that is not ordinarily possible with documents alone. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.862                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Intercepting computer communications and emanations can provide an inside look at the 
supply, purchasing, manufacturing, and marketing channels of a target that cannot be 
replicated by another source.  
 
The fact that a technical activity is possible does not mean that it is advisable. Most types of 
electronic surveillance carry potentially serious repercussions. In many cases they are clearly 
illegal. Any prudent spy will employ technical intelligence methods with restraint. Only 
amateurs will rush into a surveillance operation by “bugging” this line and that junction box. 
These novices ignore the fact that the more one bugs, the greater the chances of having the 
surveillance campaign discovered. In addition, a corporate spy with any seasoning will realize 
that indiscriminate bugging produces too much signal traffic to analyze.  
 
Experienced corporate spies know what they are looking for and devise carefully protected 
collection plans before initiating their surveillance campaigns. They know that the more time 
spent planning, the more likely it is that their electronic surveillance will go undetected and 
the greater the intelligence yield will be. The rules most BI professionals use for protected 
electronic surveillance include the following: 
 
If devices (such as microphones or video cameras) are to be left on-site, those devices must 
not be traceable back to the spy or the client. The markings on the equipment must not 
establish a trail on which to build an investigation. Experienced spies use generic equipment 
available from multiple sources. 
 
Wire taps and their associated devices must blend into their surroundings so nothing appears 
out of the ordinary to the layperson. Smart spies do not use contraptions that can easily be 
identified as bugs.   
 
Radio transmitters must not send signals in those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that 
are in common commercial use. Professionals avoid using cellular telephone bands, CB 
channels, or AM or FM radio channels for covert transmissions. They also find out if the 
target site uses commercial two-way radio frequencies and avoid using those bands. 
 
A competent spy does not leave a hard wire connection between the wiretap and the place 
where he conducts listening. If someone located the tap, all that person would have to do is 
trace the hard wire line to locate the spy.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.863 
If the spy conducts off-site reception of computer emanations and signals, the reception 
vehicle or site should have sufficient camouflage or should be adequately disguised to avoid 
any notice or detection. 
 
A good spy never reveals anything about an intelligence campaign to anyone except her 
client, even after the job is finished. 
 
Once a job is finished and a report has been written and delivered to the client, a spy 
destroys all documentary evidence of the campaign. 
 
Aerial Photography
Though its origins lie in the military sector, aerial photography has emerged as a valuable 
tool in business intelligence. Google Earth, a free, online tool that enables users to obtain an 
aerial photo of properties by satellite, has made gathering this type of intelligence quite easy. 
Additionally, there are private aerial photography firms that have fairly complete negatives 
for land in their service area. These firms also accept special assignments to photograph 
specific ground areas on a schedule specified by the client. Aerial photography is used by 
spies to gather information on a competitor’s construction or expansion products, to 
measure the size of its shipments, or to determine the number of employees that the 
company has working, among other things. 
 
Bugging and Wiretapping 
Hidden microphones, wiretaps, and other forms of electronic surveillance equipment have 
become extremely common ways for intelligence professionals to keep tabs on their 
competition. The spy has two primary considerations in a wiretapping campaign: where to 
insert the surveillance equipment and which of the various technologies to employ. 
 
The Insertion Point 
In identifying the insertion point, the spy not only has to choose an area where proprietary 
information is likely to be discussed or displayed on computer screens, but also where 
background noise and electronic interference remain minimal. Spies frequently choose areas 
with proximity to computers and telecommunications equipment carrying proprietary data as 
an insertion point.  
 
Spies may also target areas conducive to employee conversations. This can include any place, 
inside or outside the targeted company, where key personnel gather and chat. Examples 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.864                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
include smoking areas; recreational areas such as bars, lounges, and coffeehouses; employee 
cafeterias; relaxation areas; exercise rooms; and meeting rooms. To target particular 
operations such as information services, spies might wire the offices of key managers, which 
are likely to provide access to a large portion of human information flow. 
 
The Technology 
In determining which technologies to employ, the spy must factor in environmental 
conditions such as lighting (if video surveillance is employed), noise levels, and distance from 
the source. Other factors include the risk of  the sensing device being discovered, power 
supply problems, and access to the device for servicing after installation.  
 
Common electronic eavesdropping devices include: 
• Drop-in telephone bugs  
• Carbon microphones 
• Magnetic or dynamic microphones 
• Electret microphone 
• Spike microphones 
• Cavity microphones 
• Low power consumption transmitters 
• Infinity transmitters  
• Shotgun or parabolic microphones  
• Cellular telephone receivers 
• Video cameras and transmitters 
• Satellite tracking of vehicles 
 
It is not difficult at all for spies to purchase electronic listening equipment. The Internet, for 
example, has a number of sites that advertise vast inventories of equipment ranging from 
audio devices to miniature video cameras to satellite tracking systems. Most of these sites 
urge their customers to use their merchandise only in a legally appropriate manner and 
advertise the equipment for purposes like checking for intruders or ensuring one’s own 
privacy. In truth, however, these devices can and are used by corporate spies to pilfer the 
proprietary secrets of their targets.  
 
Some of the more common forms of surveillance equipment are discussed in the following 
sections.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.865 
SATELLITE TRACKING SYSTEMS 
In most satellite tracking systems, a small transmitter is surreptitiously attached to the 
subject’s vehicle. Common hiding areas include the trunk, inside fenders, or under the rear 
bumper. The transmitter communicates with global positioning satellites (GPS) and converts 
the coordinates of the vehicle onto a map. The spy only needs access to the Internet and a 
password to enter a special, private home page where he can view maps that show the 
vehicle’s location and path. These systems are capable of generating event lists and plain-text 
histories of where the vehicle has traveled. A variation on this tracking design is that in some 
satellite tracking software the system creates a trail of electronic breadcrumbs on the map 
display. The map can be a powerful tool in tracking the movements of executives and key 
company employees.  
 
DROP-IN TELEPHONE BUGS 
Spies frequently use drop-in telephone bugs, which have the advantage of blending in with 
everyday existing telephone equipment. Drop-in bugs are simply inserted into the handset 
device on a normal telephone. The target’s conv ersations are transmitted to a remote 
receiver where they are recorded.  
 
Drop-in bugs are rarely detected because most people never bother to unscrew the plastic 
covers on the handset and perform a detailed check of the internal components. Thus, a 
drop-in telephone bug offers minimal risk of exposure to the spy. When a spy has access to 
the physical premises of a target and wants to be able to listen to conversations on a 
particular telephone line, this device is usually the chosen method of surveillance.  
 
CARBON MICROPHONES 
Carbon microphones, while larger than most spy audio devices, provide good pick-up if 
properly hidden and located. They offer excellent coverage of fixed locations: smoke rooms, 
employee lounges, and other gathering spots. As with other forms of listening equipment, 
these microphones are usually equipped with a transmitter that relays intercepted 
conversations off-site to a recorder. This is much safer, from the spy’s perspective, than 
maintaining a recorder on-site. With a remote transmitter, even if the microphone is 
detected, the recorded material cannot be located or recovered by the target. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.866                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
MAGNETIC AND ELECTRET MICROPHONES 
Magnetic or dynamic microphones can be very  small. They are useful when a microphone 
needs to be close to the speakers and hidden inside something small. Electret microphones 
also provide good close range coverage. Both types of microphones are smaller than the 
standard carbon microphone, though they tend to offer a lower range of coverage. 
 
SPIKE AND CAVITY MICROPHONES 
Spike and cavity microphones work best when the spy has access to an adjoining area and 
needs to penetrate his surveillance into the next room. For example, if a spy has free range in 
a utility room next door or in an adjacent hotel or motel room, a spike microphone can be 
inserted through the adjoining wall to monitor conversations in the target’s room. This type 
of microphone is so small at its insertion point that it is virtually undetectable to the casual 
observer. 
 
INFINITY TRANSMITTERS 
Infinity transmitters are a special kind of device that can be activated from a remote location. 
Once an infinity transmitter has been inserted  in a phone, a spy can call that telephone from 
anywhere in the world and turn it into a listening device. Unknown to the parties present, 
the telephone becomes a hidden microphone. 
 
SHOTGUN OR PARABOLIC MICROPHONES 
For listening to conversations at a long distance, shotgun microphones, parabolic 
microphone devices, and laser audio detection equipment can overhear even quiet 
discussions, provided background noise is not too high. The spy has to be mindful of having 
adequate cover to protect the listening post.  
 
WIRETAPS 
Wiretapping involves splicing a listening or recording device into a wire (such as a telephone 
wire, a PBX cable, an alarm system, or a local area network cable) that is used for 
communication by the target. Standard phone systems, in particular, are very vulnerable to 
wiretapping. Taps are usually placed at the telephone box in the basements of buildings, on 
lines outside buildings, or on telephone pole junction boxes near the target’s offices. The 
different types of wiretaps that can be utilized include: hardwired wiretap, soft wiretap, 
record wiretap, and transmit wiretap. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.867 
Warning Signs of Bugging  
Covert eavesdropping may be difficult to detect, particularly because most people do not 
know what signs to look for. James M. Atki nson of the Granite Island Group, one of the 
leading technical surveillance countermeasures firms in the U.S., has compiled a list of 27 
warning signs that might indicate that an organization is the target of an electronic 
eavesdropping campaign.1 Those red flags are listed below:   
• Others seem to know your confidential business or trade secrets. This is the most 
common indicator of a bugging campaign.  
• Information discussed in secret meetings or contained in secret bids does not remain 
secret. Confidential meetings are among the most popular targets of corporate spies.  
• People seem to know about your organization’s activities when they should not.  
• Strange sounds or volume changes are detected on your phone lines. This is a common 
byproduct of wiretaps or activation of a similar listening device. 
• You notice unusual static, popping, or scra tching on phone lines. This is another 
common sign of a wiretap or bug. 
• You can hear sounds coming from your phone handset when it is hung up. This is 
typically caused by a device called a “hook switch bypass,” which turns a telephone 
receiver into an eavesdropping microphone and speaker and allows a spy to monitor 
conversations near the phone (usually within 20 feet).  
• Your phone rings and nobody is on the other end of the line, but you hear a very faint 
tone, or a high-pitched squeal and beep. This is an indicator of a slave device, or line 
extender being used on your phone line. This is also a key indicator of a harmonica bug 
or infinity transmitter being used. 
• You hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook (by using an external 
amplifier). 
• An office radio suddenly develops strange interference. This could be caused by 
eavesdropping devices that use frequencies within or just outside the FM radio band. 
These signals tend drift and will quiet FM radios  in the vicinity of the bug. To check for 
bugs, look for transmissions at the far ends of the FM radio band, and at any quiet area 
along the FM band. If the radio begins to squeal, slowly move it around the room until 
the sound becomes very high pitched. The radio should be set to the “mono” function 
rather than “stereo,” as this will increase its level of sensitivity.  
• A car radio suddenly starts “getting weird.” Keep in mind that the antenna used by a car 
                                                          
1 This list is provided courtesy of James M. Atkinson and The Granite Island Group, 127 Eastern Avenue, 
#291, Gloucester, MA 01930, (978) 546-3803. (www.tscm.com). e-mail:  jmatk@tscm.com 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.868                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
may be (and often is) exploited by an eavesdropper and that such usage might interfere 
with radio transmission. 
• An office television suddenly develops interference. Eavesdropping devices can tend to 
interfere with television reception.  
• Your office appears to have been burglarized, but nothing was taken. Someone could 
have entered the premises in order to plant a listening device. 
• Electrical wall plates (covering outlets, switches, smoke alarms, and lighting fixtures) 
appear to have been moved slightly. These are among the most popular locations for 
hiding listening devices, which requires that the plates be removed. Watch for slight 
variations in the color or appearance of the power outlets or light switches as these are 
often swamped out by an eavesdropper.  
• A dime-sized discoloration appears on an office wall or ceiling. This is a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed.  
• One of your vendors gives you an electronic device such as a desk radio, alarm clock, 
CD player, or small television. These gifts frequently contain secret eavesdropping 
devices.  
• A small bump or deformation has appeared on the baseboard by the floor. This is a 
strong indicator that someone may have concealed covert wiring or a microphone 
imbedded into the adhesive that holds the molding to the floor. 
• A smoke detector, clock, lamp or exit sign in your office or home looks slightly crooked, 
has a small hole in the surface, has a quasi reflective surface, or otherwise appears to 
have been tampered with. These items are also common places for concealing bugs.  
• Certain items just appear in your office without anyone knowing how they got there. 
Typical items to watch for and beware of are: clocks, exit signs, sprinkler heads, radios, 
picture frames, and lamps. They may contain listening equipment and could have been 
placed in your offices by a spy. 
• Drywall dust or debris is found on the floor next to a wall. This could be a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed nearby.  
• Small pieces of ceiling tile or grit are found on the floor or on a desk. Also, a cracked, 
chipped or gouged ceiling tile, sagging ceiling tiles, or ceiling tiles not properly set into 
track may be observed. This indicates that a ceiling tile has been moved, possibly because 
someone has installed a technical surveillance device above your ceiling. 
• Phone company trucks and utilities workers seem to be spending a lot of time near your 
home or office. These workers could actually be corporate spies in disguise. 
• Telephone, cable, plumbing, or air conditioning repair people show up to work when no 
one called them. This is a very common method for an eavesdropper to plant a bug.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.869 
• Service or delivery trucks are often parked nearby with nobody in them. These vehicles 
may be listening posts for spies. In particular, look for vehicles that have ladders or pipe 
racks on the roof, have tinted windows, and are large enough to conceal a person in  
the back.  
• Your door locks suddenly do not “feel right,” they become “sticky,” or they fail 
altogether. This is evidence that the lock has been picked, manipulated, or bypassed by 
an intruder.  
• Furniture appears to have been moved slightly and no one knows why. Eavesdropping 
devices are commonly hidden behind or inside furniture.  
• Things seem to have been rummaged through, but nothing is missing. This could be a 
sign that someone has been looking through your papers, perhaps even copying them 
before returning them to your work area. The most common “rummaging” targets are 
the backs of desk drawers, the bottom of file cabinets, closets, and dresser drawers. 
• An eavesdropper sends you a copy of your private conversations. As simple as it seems 
this is the strongest indicator, and solid proof of eavesdropping. An eavesdropper will 
sometimes send a victim a copy of a private conversation they intercepted in an attempt 
at blackmail, or in an attempt to terrorize or just stalk the victim. This is commonly seen 
in civil lawsuits, criminal court cases, marital problems, shareholder disputes, custody 
battles, and other situations where one side has a position of weakness and is 
psychologically trying to undermine their opponent. 
 
Preliminary Search Procedures 
If an organization suspects that wiretapping has occurred, there are a number of preliminary 
search procedures that the layperson can perform. This section is not designed to make the 
reader an expert at counter-surveillance techniques; professionals who offer those services 
can easily be located. However, it is quite feasible for an ordinary person to conduct a basic 
search for wiretapping equipment. When conducting an inspection for electronic 
surveillance equipment, be mindful of safety concerns. Never reach into electrical boxes or 
outlets unless you are sure the power is off, and do not grasp bare wires unless you know 
they are not live. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.870                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KNOW YOUR DEVICES 
Wiretapping devices, for the most part, look like hobbyist electronic circuit boards. The 
major difference is that they are much smaller than the circuit boards of the past. Satellite 
tracking equipment is usually housed in small metal boxes about the size of a paperback 
book. They require small antennae that have to face toward the sky.  
 
INSPECTING TELEPHONES 
If the mouthpieces or earpieces on telephone handsets have screw-off plastic covers, remove 
them and make sure no transmitters or unusual looking components are attached to the 
microphone condensers. Also examine the markings on the condenser unit. Do they match a 
condenser from a similar telephone kept in a secure area? If the markings are significantly 
different, have them checked by a representative from the telephone manufacturer. 
 
If the cover on the handset is one solid piece of plastic, look at the two screws that hold the 
plastic plate on. If the screws have scratches on them (e.g., from a screwdriver) remove the 
screws and take the plate off. Examine the condensers for signs of tampering or for 
miniature transmitters.  
 
Examine the back or underside of the telephones. Look for unusual components taped or 
held by a magnet to the back metal plate. Also look for unusual wires protruding from the 
phone. (This means any wires other than the regular plastic sheathed cord that is found on 
all telephones.) If these examinations are negative, then the telephone is probably secure.  
 
If you still suspect the presence of a listening device, do not attempt to disassemble the main 
part of the telephone. You may damage the unit. Instead, look at the screws holding down 
the main body of the phone to the metal plate. If those screws show signs of tampering, 
have someone from the manufacturer examine the unit. 
 
It is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephone attaches to the wall. 
Carefully remove the cover and check for any electronic components inside. In a normal 
wall box, you should only see wires and screw points where the wires are tied together. 
Extraneous components could be electronic listening devices. If you are not sure whether 
the item you have identified is actually a transmitter or microphone, contact a qualified 
                                                          
2 The Granite Island Group, a technical surveillance countermeasures firm, provides photographs of some 
electronic surveillance equipment on its website. (www.tscm.com/whatistscm.html) 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.871 
countermeasures expert, the phone company, or a representative from the phone 
manufacturer.  
 
INTERFACE BOX 
The interface box is a gray box typically located on the side of the building. If a business 
operates in a multiple occupancy structure, the interface box may be located in a utility closet 
close to the company’s offices. In order to ex amine the interface box, unscrew the side of 
the box that is designed for customer access. Look inside with a flashlight. All wiring in the 
box should look the same, using the colors red, blue, green, yellow, and black. You might see 
some striped wires, but that is fine. There should also be a line coming into the side of the 
box from the telephone company. What you should be looking for is a transmitter or some 
form of unusual wiring that does not appear to come from the telephone company and does 
not lead into your building or office. This could indicate a wiretap. 
 
ABOVE THE CEILING 
If an open space exists above the ceiling in your offices, access that area and look around 
with a flashlight. Be on the lookout for everything from sophisticated transmitters to tape 
recorders that are crudely hooked into telephone lines. If listening devices have been placed 
in an attic or in a crawl space above the ceiling, they probably have not been elaborately 
camouflaged. It should not be exceedingly difficult to spot surveillance equipment in these 
areas.  
 
It is a good idea to have the lights turned on in the room below while you search overhead. 
If someone has drilled holes in the ceiling to insert a microphone, the light should shine 
through the ceiling and you will be able to detect the holes. Surveillance personnel frequently 
drill multiple holes before selecting just one as a listening spot or inserting a miniature video 
camera.  
 
OTHER PLACES TO SEARCH 
Use a flashlight to look through the grill panels covering all air conditioning ducts for 
transmitters or listening devices. Carefully inspect all electrical outlets by removing the cover 
plates and looking inside with a flashlight. Examine any central utility closets for unusual 
wiring and electronic devices. Look for signs of  debris on the floor under outlets or light 
switches; this might indicate that someone has removed the wall plates to insert a listening 
device. Any time ducts, outlet plates, light fixtures, or similar items have been searched and 
replaced, their orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.872                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
markers. By shining an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have 
been removed. This technique makes it much easier to determine if someone has tampered 
with those items since the last search.  
 
Look under desks and tables in all office spaces  for electronic devices or wires that seem out 
of place. Do not tear your office apart while conducting your search; feel your way around 
and explore with your hands. Look under and behind couches and sofas. It is especially 
important to closely examine furniture in areas where people are likely to sit and chat. The 
tables and credenzas in meeting rooms should be checked on a regular basis.  
 
Check any television sets, radios, lamps, telephones, computers, clocks, smoke detectors, or 
sprinkler heads in the room. If any areas are served by cable TV, be sure to check out the 
cable lines, converter box, line splitters, and connectors for anything that seems out of place. 
Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed, as unused wiring 
can be used for eavesdropping. 
 
COMPUTERS 
Always check the back of computers for monitoring devices taped to the back panel. 
Examine all connections between the computer and the outside world: lines to printers, 
network cables, lines to peripheral devices, or lines to monitors. Pay attention to any 
connectors that have been placed between the computer and its external lines. These 
connectors may look like they perform a legitimate function, but if the external line could 
have been plugged directly into the computer, find out why the interface was inserted and 
who put it there. 
 
The area immediately around the computer should be checked for unusual wiring, electronic 
boxes, or devices. Any closets or rooms dedicated to housing network equipment such as 
hubs, routers, cabling rigs, or network monitoring gear needs close examination by a 
qualified network technician to make sure no alien electronic devices are present.  
 
Video Surveillance 
The role that video cameras play in the corporate espionage campaigns has several 
dimensions. Microcameras placed in a room of computer screens can focus on individual 
screens and result in the taping of: passwords, logins, user manuals, text specifics, error 
messages, contents of documents, and keyboard overlays during many hours of transactions. 
Cameras can be used to monitor activity on receiving and shipping docks. Planted 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.873 
microcameras can track activity on production lines or presentations in meeting rooms. They 
can also capture executives or key employees at embarrassing moments. Such 
documentation can later be used for blackmail. 
 
Video cameras with a time and date stamp on the footage offer a means of determining the 
security activity in the company. Times of security patrols, access to special areas like labs, 
the emptying of security wastebaskets, and other activities can all be tracked. This 
information can aid a spy in penetrating restricted or sensitive areas. 
 
Photographic Cameras 
Almost as ubiquitous as the bug, the miniature camera plays a lead role in the canon of 
spycraft. Many a motion picture has shown the spy, whether af ter military or industrial 
secrets, bent over documents quickly snapping the shutter. With the tiny cameras available 
today, industrial spies can sneak out of a company’s premises with numerous secrets tucked 
away in a purse or shirt pocket.  
 
Minicameras 
With the advent of copy machines in almost every American business, the need to employ 
the minicamera to capture information from documents dramatically declined. Because 
many sensitive documents are stored in electronic format, computer media such as disks, 
CDs, USB flash drives, and other storage devices have also eroded the need for film 
cameras. Some applications do, however, still exist for the minicamera. Documents such as 
maps, schematics, diagrams, and engineering drawings frequently cannot be easily copied due 
to their size. The minicamera is a viable option for capturing the information on these items.  
 
Concealed stationary cameras with large rolls of film have largely been replaced by video 
cameras. Film is difficult to replace at hidden, sensitive sites. It is also expensive to process. 
Videotape is cheap, needs no processing, and ca n be recorded off-site, far from the video 
camera/transmitter. Thus, even if the target company discovers the hidden video camera, 
the footage will remain safely in the spy’s control.  

Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.874                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Infrared Film 
Infrared film has value when surveillance is done under very low light or when the spy needs 
to examine damaged or erased documents. Even the contents of burned documents can be 
detected under the right conditions with infrared film.  
 
Digital Cameras 
As digital cameras become smaller in both cost and size, they may become a more 
formidable tool in the corporate spy’s arsenal. Digital images are captured on a small disk 
whose contents can be loaded into a computer. The image can be enhanced and manipulated 
using various software programs, thereby offering excellent resolution. The disk carrying the 
stolen image can be carried off and on premises with little chance of detection. 

For any good spy, a good digital camera is the mainstay in his surveillance arsenal. Even if 
extensive aerial photographs are taken, observation of the target site at ground level is 
essential. From the ground view many features like signs, lettering on the side of vehicles, 
the configuration of buildings and streets, license plates, and other important details become 
visible. Photographs of key employees of the target can also be valuable information in many 
intelligence campaigns. 
 
To avoid attracting attention, the intelligence specialist generally uses telescopic or reflective 
lenses to zoom in on details from a safe distance. In building a visual file on a plant site, a 
spy will take ground level photographs from around the entire circumference of the targeted 
area. He will even photograph CRT and computer screens that are visible through windows.  
 
To aid in analyzing photographs at a later date, the specialist will catalogue all photographs 
as to: 
• Subject matter 
• Date/time of day 
• Direction of shot 
• Number in a sequence of shots 
• Important features in shot 
 
This data can be stored in a database like Microsoft Access ®. Photographs themselves can 
be incorporated into the database by scanning them into the computer from a flat glass 
scanner or by loading them from a digital camera. Photographic images, excerpts from 
videotape surveillance, aerial photographs, and relevant diagrams, document images, or 
drawings can be also integrated into one database for extensive analysis. Analytical 
investigative databases like i2 allow for the organization of visual data. A database generates 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.875 
various narrative reports, charts, diagrams, and chronologies. The opportunities for an 
information multiplier effect are tremendous. 
 
Cellular Telephones 
Anyone who conducts a sensitive or confidential conversation on a cellular telephone is 
either highly naive or plain foolish. These transmissions are transparent to the secret services 
of all governments. Any amateur with a receiver can also pick up cellular communications. 
Most corporate spies will, as a matter of course, scan cellular frequencies around a targeted 
plant. They will also focus in on cellular telephone calls by executives and key employees. By 
simple physical surveillance, a spy can observe an executive pull out his cellular telephone in 
the car, in a restaurant, or in the grocery store. This will alert the spy to begin monitoring the 
target’s cellular frequency. Employees should always keep in mind that someone could be 
listening to their conversations. Sensitive information should not be conveyed by cellular 
phone. As with other surveillance equipment, the tools necessary to monitor cellular 
telephone conversations are easy to come by. 
 
Monitoring Computer Emanations  
Digital computers process information with a series of 0s and 1s. These two digits do not 
translate to “on” and “off” states, but rather to high and low currents. These currents cause 
pixels on a computer screen to fire, producing high voltage pulses that emanate into the 
surrounding environment. Computer emanations form a detectable and decodable pattern. A 
detector or receiver, known as a Van Eck unit, can reproduce keyboard entries on a 
computer screen even from a considerable distance. 
 
A Van Eck unit consists of a directional antenna, logic circuits, and two adjustable oscillators 
(one for the vertical and one for the horizontal). With proper adjustments, a van parked 
across the street, equipped with a Van Eck receiver, can decode the emanations from a 
keyboard operator inside a neighboring building. Devices like CPUs, taped drives, disk 
drives, and communications devices all generate electromagnetic radiation, which Van Eck 
receivers can detect. 
 
To prevent competitors from monitoring computer emanations, organizations can shield 
their computer equipment and transmission lines: a process known as Tempesting. While this 
process is used extensively in the military and by certain defense contractors, the costs 
involved prevent many private sector businesses from employing Tempest procedures.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.876                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Tape Recorders 
The best place for a spy to place a tape recorder is off-site, far away from the microphone. A 
transmitter located with the microphone sends a signal to an off-site receiver that is 
connected to the tape recorder. This precaution ensures that a compromise of the 
microphone will not result in capture of the tape. Recorders can also be hooked up directly 
to telephones in order to record tapped phone conversations.  
 
All that is necessary to create a crude wireless phone tap is a capacitor (to block the DC 
voltage from the telephone line) wired in series with a small AM or FM transmitter across 
the telephone wire pair. An AM or FM radio plug ged into a tape recorder picks up the signal 
by taking the output from the radio’s audio ja ck. A professional would not use this kind of 
tap, but a security investigator has to be on the lookout for the amateur spy too. Some 
employees want to get inside information to gain an advantage over their coworkers. 
Bugging the boss’s telephone is a good way to do it. 
 
Computer System Penetrations
In some cases, information thieves will attempt to extract information by penetrating a 
company’s computer defenses. This can be part of an organized intelligence campaign, or in 
some cases it is simply a random attack by a hacker bent on mischief. For more information 
on how outsiders attempt to penetrate computer systems, see the “Computer and Internet 
Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
 



:


technic surveil
the popular imag of the spy at least as portrai on televis and in the movi is veri
often associ with all sort of hightech gadget everyth from miniatur camera to
exot listen devic to radio wristwatch and telephon hidden in shoe obvious
mani of these devic ar fanci and while thei mai provid interest entertain
thei ar far remov from the real world of corpor espionag
corpor spi do howev emploi variou form of technolog surveil equip
the tool vari accord to the need of the job at hand in gener corpor spi onli
resort to us hightech equip when simpler mean ar not avail to accomplish the
task in some case a miniatur camera might be call for to copi sensit document but
not when a nearbi copi machin can be us to achiev the same result in other instanc a
wiretap mai be need but onli when there is no other mean to monitor a subject
commun sometim satellit track of motor vehicl becom necessari but not
when simpl visual surveil will tell the spy where the subject ha travel in other
word corpor spi that know what thei ar do do not emploi technolog for the sake
of us fanci gadget
when spi do resort to the us of technic surveil equip it is usual to gather
nondocumentari evid or inform that cannot be found through open sourc or in
the target file the method that spi emploi to gather nondocumentari inform
includ 1 take photograph 2 conduct surveil and visual sight 3 listen
to convers 4 monitor comput and comput commun 5 analyz
traffic at a plant and 6 monitor eman from comput and telecommun
equip
nondocumentari inform ha certain advantag it captur chang over time
photograph taken at differ time or process as thei occur videotap electron
surveil can provid the spy with inform that would take mani hour of
documentari analysi to acquir aerial photographi provid a broad perspect on the
manufactur physic plant that is not ordinarili possibl with document alon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1862 2011 fraud examin manual
intercept comput commun and eman can provid an insid look at the
suppli purchas manufactur and market channel of a target that cannot be
replic by anoth sourc
the fact that a technic activ is possibl doe not mean that it is advis most type of
electron surveil carri potenti seriou repercuss in mani case thei ar clearli
illeg ani prudent spy will emploi technic intellig method with restraint onli
amateur will rush into a surveil oper by bug thi line and that junction box
these novic ignor the fact that the more on bug the greater the chanc of have the
surveil campaign discov in addit a corpor spy with ani season will realiz
that indiscrimin bug produc too much signal traffic to analyz
experienc corpor spi know what thei ar look for and devis carefulli protect
collect plan befor initi their surveil campaign thei know that the more time
spent plan the more like it is that their electron surveil will go undetect and
the greater the intellig yield will be the rule most bi profession us for protect
electron surveil includ the follow
if devic such as microphon or video camera ar to be left onsit those devic must
not be traceabl back to the spy or the client the mark on the equip must not
establish a trail on which to build an investig experienc spi us gener equip
avail from multipl sourc
wire tap and their associ devic must blend into their surround so noth appear
out of the ordinari to the layperson smart spi do not us contrapt that can easili be
identifi as bug
radio transmitt must not send signal in those part of the electromagnet spectrum that
ar in common commerci us profession avoid us cellular telephon band cb
channel or am or fm radio channel for covert transmiss thei also find out if the
target site us commerci twowai radio frequenc and avoid us those band
a compet spy doe not leav a hard wire connect between the wiretap and the place
where he conduct listen if someon locat the tap all that person would have to do is
trace the hard wire line to locat the spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1863
if the spy conduct offsit recept of comput eman and signal the recept
vehicl or site should have suffici camouflag or should be adequ disguis to avoid
ani notic or detect
a good spy never reveal anyth about an intellig campaign to anyon except her
client even after the job is finish
onc a job is finish and a report ha been written and deliv to the client a spy
destroi all documentari evid of the campaign
aerial photographi
though it origin lie in the militari sector aerial photographi ha emerg as a valuabl
tool in busi intellig googl earth a free onlin tool that enabl user to obtain an
aerial photo of properti by satellit ha made gather thi type of intellig quit easi
addition there ar privat aerial photographi firm that have fairli complet neg
for land in their servic area these firm also accept special assign to photograph
specif ground area on a schedul specifi by the client aerial photographi is us by
spi to gather inform on a competitor construct or expans product to
measur the size of it shipment or to determin the number of employe that the
compani ha work among other thing
bug and wiretap
hidden microphon wiretap and other form of electron surveil equip have
becom extrem common wai for intellig profession to keep tab on their
competit the spy ha two primari consider in a wiretap campaign where to
insert the surveil equip and which of the variou technolog to emploi
the insert point
in identifi the insert point the spy not onli ha to choos an area where proprietari
inform is like to be discuss or displai on comput screen but also where
background nois and electron interfer remain minim spi frequent choos area
with proxim to comput and telecommun equip carri proprietari data as
an insert point
spi mai also target area conduc to employe convers thi can includ ani place
insid or outsid the target compani where kei personnel gather and chat exampl
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1864 2011 fraud examin manual
includ smoke area recreat area such as bar loung and coffeehous employe
cafeteria relax area exercis room and meet room to target particular
oper such as inform servic spi might wire the offic of kei manag which
ar like to provid access to a larg portion of human inform flow
the technolog
in determin which technolog to emploi the spy must factor in environment
condit such as light if video surveil is emploi nois level and distanc from
the sourc other factor includ the risk of the sens devic be discov power
suppli problem and access to the devic for servic after instal
common electron eavesdrop devic includ
dropin telephon bug
carbon microphon
magnet or dynam microphon
electret microphon
spike microphon
caviti microphon
low power consumpt transmitt
infin transmitt
shotgun or parabol microphon
cellular telephon receiv
video camera and transmitt
satellit track of vehicl
it is not difficult at all for spi to purchas electron listen equip the internet for
exampl ha a number of site that advertis vast inventori of equip rang from
audio devic to miniatur video camera to satellit track system most of these site
urg their custom to us their merchandis onli in a legal appropri manner and
advertis the equip for purpos like check for intrud or ensur on own
privaci in truth howev these devic can and ar us by corpor spi to pilfer the
proprietari secret of their target
some of the more common form of surveil equip ar discuss in the follow
section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1865
satellit track system
in most satellit track system a small transmitt is surreptiti attach to the
subject vehicl common hide area includ the trunk insid fender or under the rear
bumper the transmitt commun with global posit satellit gp and convert
the coordin of the vehicl onto a map the spy onli need access to the internet and a
password to enter a special privat home page where he can view map that show the
vehicl locat and path these system ar capabl of gener event list and plaintext
histori of where the vehicl ha travel a variat on thi track design is that in some
satellit track softwar the system creat a trail of electron breadcrumb on the map
displai the map can be a power tool in track the movement of execut and kei
compani employe
dropin telephon bug
spi frequent us dropin telephon bug which have the advantag of blend in with
everydai exist telephon equip dropin bug ar simpli insert into the handset
devic on a normal telephon the target conv ersat ar transmit to a remot
receiv where thei ar record
dropin bug ar rare detect becaus most peopl never bother to unscrew the plastic
cover on the handset and perform a detail check of the intern compon thu a
dropin telephon bug offer minim risk of exposur to the spy when a spy ha access to
the physic premis of a target and want to be abl to listen to convers on a
particular telephon line thi devic is usual the chosen method of surveil
carbon microphon
carbon microphon while larger than most spy audio devic provid good pickup if
properli hidden and locat thei offer excel coverag of fix locat smoke room
employe loung and other gather spot as with other form of listen equip
these microphon ar usual equip with a transmitt that relai intercept
convers offsit to a record thi is much safer from the spy perspect than
maintain a record onsit with a remot transmitt even if the microphon is
detect the record materi cannot be locat or recov by the target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1866 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet and electret microphon
magnet or dynam microphon can be veri small thei ar us when a microphon
need to be close to the speaker and hidden insid someth small electret microphon
also provid good close rang coverag both type of microphon ar smaller than the
standard carbon microphon though thei tend to offer a lower rang of coverag
spike and caviti microphon
spike and caviti microphon work best when the spy ha access to an adjoin area and
need to penetr hi surveil into the next room for exampl if a spy ha free rang in
a util room next door or in an adjac hotel or motel room a spike microphon can be
insert through the adjoin wall to monitor convers in the target room thi type
of microphon is so small at it insert point that it is virtual undetect to the casual
observ
infin transmitt
infin transmitt ar a special kind of devic that can be activ from a remot locat
onc an infin transmitt ha been insert in a phone a spy can call that telephon from
anywher in the world and turn it into a listen devic unknown to the parti present
the telephon becom a hidden microphon
shotgun or parabol microphon
for listen to convers at a long distanc shotgun microphon parabol
microphon devic and laser audio detect equip can overhear even quiet
discuss provid background nois is not too high the spy ha to be mind of have
adequ cover to protect the listen post
wiretap
wiretap involv splice a listen or record devic into a wire such as a telephon
wire a pbx cabl an alarm system or a local area network cabl that is us for
commun by the target standard phone system in particular ar veri vulner to
wiretap tap ar usual place at the telephon box in the basement of build on
line outsid build or on telephon pole junction box near the target offic the
differ type of wiretap that can be util includ hardwir wiretap soft wiretap
record wiretap and transmit wiretap
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1867
warn sign of bug
covert eavesdrop mai be difficult to detect particularli becaus most peopl do not
know what sign to look for jame m atki nson of the granit island group on of the
lead technic surveil countermeasur firm in the us ha compil a list of 27
warn sign that might indic that an organ is the target of an electron
eavesdrop campaign1 those red flag ar list below
other seem to know your confidenti busi or trade secret thi is the most
common indic of a bug campaign
inform discuss in secret meet or contain in secret bid doe not remain
secret confidenti meet ar among the most popular target of corpor spi
peopl seem to know about your organ activ when thei should not
strang sound or volum chang ar detect on your phone line thi is a common
byproduct of wiretap or activ of a similar listen devic
you notic unusu static pop or scra tching on phone line thi is anoth
common sign of a wiretap or bug
you can hear sound come from your phone handset when it is hung up thi is
typic caus by a devic call a hook switch bypass which turn a telephon
receiv into an eavesdrop microphon and speaker and allow a spy to monitor
convers near the phone usual within 20 feet
your phone ring and nobodi is on the other end of the line but you hear a veri faint
tone or a highpitch squeal and beep thi is an indic of a slave devic or line
extend be us on your phone line thi is also a kei indic of a harmonica bug
or infin transmitt be us
you hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook by us an extern
amplifi
an offic radio suddenli develop strang interfer thi could be caus by
eavesdrop devic that us frequenc within or just outsid the fm radio band
these signal tend drift and will quiet fm radio in the vicin of the bug to check for
bug look for transmiss at the far end of the fm radio band and at ani quiet area
along the fm band if the radio begin to squeal slowli move it around the room until
the sound becom veri high pitch the radio should be set to the mono function
rather than stereo as thi will increas it level of sensit
a car radio suddenli start get weird keep in mind that the antenna us by a car
1 thi list is provid courtesi of jame m atkinson and the granit island group 127 eastern avenu
291 gloucest ma 01930 978 5463803 wwwtscmcom email jmatktscmcom
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1868 2011 fraud examin manual
mai be and often is exploit by an eavesdropp and that such usag might interfer
with radio transmiss
an offic televis suddenli develop interfer eavesdrop devic can tend to
interfer with televis recept
your offic appear to have been burglar but noth wa taken someon could
have enter the premis in order to plant a listen devic
electr wall plate cover outlet switch smoke alarm and light fixtur
appear to have been move slightli these ar among the most popular locat for
hide listen devic which requir that the plate be remov watch for slight
variat in the color or appear of the power outlet or light switch as these ar
often swamp out by an eavesdropp
a dimes discolor appear on an offic wall or ceil thi is a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal
on of your vendor give you an electron devic such as a desk radio alarm clock
cd player or small televis these gift frequent contain secret eavesdrop
devic
a small bump or deform ha appear on the baseboard by the floor thi is a
strong indic that someon mai have conceal covert wire or a microphon
imbed into the adhes that hold the mold to the floor
a smoke detector clock lamp or exit sign in your offic or home look slightli crook
ha a small hole in the surfac ha a quasi reflect surfac or otherwis appear to
have been tamper with these item ar also common place for conceal bug
certain item just appear in your offic without anyon know how thei got there
typic item to watch for and bewar of ar clock exit sign sprinkler head radio
pictur frame and lamp thei mai contain listen equip and could have been
place in your offic by a spy
drywal dust or debri is found on the floor next to a wall thi could be a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal nearbi
small piec of ceil tile or grit ar found on the floor or on a desk also a crack
chip or goug ceil tile sag ceil tile or ceil tile not properli set into
track mai be observ thi indic that a ceil tile ha been move possibl becaus
someon ha instal a technic surveil devic abov your ceil
phone compani truck and util worker seem to be spend a lot of time near your
home or offic these worker could actual be corpor spi in disguis
telephon cabl plumb or air condit repair peopl show up to work when no
on call them thi is a veri common method for an eavesdropp to plant a bug
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1869
servic or deliveri truck ar often park nearbi with nobodi in them these vehicl
mai be listen post for spi in particular look for vehicl that have ladder or pipe
rack on the roof have tint window and ar larg enough to conceal a person in
the back
your door lock suddenli do not feel right thei becom sticki or thei fail
altogeth thi is evid that the lock ha been pick manipul or bypass by
an intrud
furnitur appear to have been move slightli and no on know why eavesdrop
devic ar commonli hidden behind or insid furnitur
thing seem to have been rummag through but noth is miss thi could be a
sign that someon ha been look through your paper perhap even copi them
befor return them to your work area the most common rummag target ar
the back of desk drawer the bottom of file cabinet closet and dresser drawer
an eavesdropp send you a copi of your privat convers as simpl as it seem
thi is the strongest indic and solid proof of eavesdrop an eavesdropp will
sometim send a victim a copi of a privat convers thei intercept in an attempt
at blackmail or in an attempt to terror or just stalk the victim thi is commonli seen
in civil lawsuit crimin court case marit problem sharehold disput custodi
battl and other situat where on side ha a posit of weak and is
psycholog try to undermin their oppon
preliminari search procedur
if an organ suspect that wiretap ha occur there ar a number of preliminari
search procedur that the layperson can perform thi section is not design to make the
reader an expert at countersurveil techniqu profession who offer those servic
can easili be locat howev it is quit feasibl for an ordinari person to conduct a basic
search for wiretap equip when conduct an inspect for electron
surveil equip be mind of safeti concern never reach into electr box or
outlet unless you ar sure the power is off and do not grasp bare wire unless you know
thei ar not live
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1870 2011 fraud examin manual
know your devic
wiretap devic for the most part look like hobbyist electron circuit board the
major differ is that thei ar much smaller than the circuit board of the past satellit
track equip is usual hous in small metal box about the size of a paperback
book thei requir small antenna that have to face toward the sky
inspect telephon
if the mouthpiec or earpiec on telephon handset have screwoff plastic cover remov
them and make sure no transmitt or unusu look compon ar attach to the
microphon condens also examin the mark on the condens unit do thei match a
condens from a similar telephon kept in a secur area if the mark ar significantli
differ have them check by a repres from the telephon manufactur
if the cover on the handset is on solid piec of plastic look at the two screw that hold the
plastic plate on if the screw have scratch on them eg from a screwdriv remov the
screw and take the plate off examin the condens for sign of tamper or for
miniatur transmitt
examin the back or undersid of the telephon look for unusu compon tape or
held by a magnet to the back metal plate also look for unusu wire protrud from the
phone thi mean ani wire other than the regular plastic sheath cord that is found on
all telephon if these examin ar neg then the telephon is probabl secur
if you still suspect the presenc of a listen devic do not attempt to disassembl the main
part of the telephon you mai damag the unit instead look at the screw hold down
the main bodi of the phone to the metal plate if those screw show sign of tamper
have someon from the manufactur examin the unit
it is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephon attach to the wall
carefulli remov the cover and check for ani electron compon insid in a normal
wall box you should onli see wire and screw point where the wire ar ti togeth
extran compon could be electron listen devic if you ar not sure whether
the item you have identifi is actual a transmitt or microphon contact a qualifi
2 the granit island group a technic surveil countermeasur firm provid photograph of some
electron surveil equip on it websit wwwtscmcomwhatistscmhtml
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1871
countermeasur expert the phone compani or a repres from the phone
manufactur
interfac box
the interfac box is a grai box typic locat on the side of the build if a busi
oper in a multipl occup structur the interfac box mai be locat in a util closet
close to the compani offic in order to ex amin the interfac box unscrew the side of
the box that is design for custom access look insid with a flashlight all wire in the
box should look the same us the color red blue green yellow and black you might see
some stripe wire but that is fine there should also be a line come into the side of the
box from the telephon compani what you should be look for is a transmitt or some
form of unusu wire that doe not appear to come from the telephon compani and doe
not lead into your build or offic thi could indic a wiretap
abov the ceil
if an open space exist abov the ceil in your offic access that area and look around
with a flashlight be on the lookout for everyth from sophist transmitt to tape
record that ar crude hook into telephon line if listen devic have been place
in an attic or in a crawl space abov the ceil thei probabl have not been elabor
camouflag it should not be exceedingli difficult to spot surveil equip in these
area
it is a good idea to have the light turn on in the room below while you search overhead
if someon ha drill hole in the ceil to insert a microphon the light should shine
through the ceil and you will be abl to detect the hole surveil personnel frequent
drill multipl hole befor select just on as a listen spot or insert a miniatur video
camera
other place to search
us a flashlight to look through the grill panel cover all air condit duct for
transmitt or listen devic carefulli inspect all electr outlet by remov the cover
plate and look insid with a flashlight examin ani central util closet for unusu
wire and electron devic look for sign of debri on the floor under outlet or light
switch thi might indic that someon ha remov the wall plate to insert a listen
devic ani time duct outlet plate light fixtur or similar item have been search and
replac their orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1872 2011 fraud examin manual
marker by shine an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have
been remov thi techniqu make it much easier to determin if someon ha tamper
with those item sinc the last search
look under desk and tabl in all offic space for electron devic or wire that seem out
of place do not tear your offic apart while conduct your search feel your wai around
and explor with your hand look under and behind couch and sofa it is especi
import to close examin furnitur in area where peopl ar like to sit and chat the
tabl and credenza in meet room should be check on a regular basi
check ani televis set radio lamp telephon comput clock smoke detector or
sprinkler head in the room if ani area ar serv by cabl tv be sure to check out the
cabl line convert box line splitter and connector for anyth that seem out of place
ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov as unus wire
can be us for eavesdrop
comput
alwai check the back of comput for monitor devic tape to the back panel
examin all connect between the comput and the outsid world line to printer
network cabl line to peripher devic or line to monitor pai attent to ani
connector that have been place between the comput and it extern line these
connector mai look like thei perform a legitim function but if the extern line could
have been plug directli into the comput find out why the interfac wa insert and
who put it there
the area immedi around the comput should be check for unusu wire electron
box or devic ani closet or room dedic to hous network equip such as
hub router cabl rig or network monitor gear need close examin by a
qualifi network technician to make sure no alien electron devic ar present
video surveil
the role that video camera plai in the corpor espionag campaign ha sever
dimens microcamera place in a room of comput screen can focu on individu
screen and result in the tape of password login user manual text specif error
messag content of document and keyboard overlai dure mani hour of transact
camera can be us to monitor activ on receiv and ship dock plant
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1873
microcamera can track activ on product line or present in meet room thei
can also captur execut or kei employe at embarrass moment such
document can later be us for blackmail
video camera with a time and date stamp on the footag offer a mean of determin the
secur activ in the compani time of secur patrol access to special area like lab
the empti of secur wastebasket and other activ can all be track thi
inform can aid a spy in penetr restrict or sensit area
photograph camera
almost as ubiquit as the bug the miniatur camera plai a lead role in the canon of
spycraft mani a motion pictur ha shown the spy whether af ter militari or industri
secret bent over document quickli snap the shutter with the tini camera avail
todai industri spi can sneak out of a compani premis with numer secret tuck
awai in a purs or shirt pocket
minicamera
with the advent of copi machin in almost everi american busi the need to emploi
the minicamera to captur inform from document dramat declin becaus
mani sensit document ar store in electron format comput media such as disk
cd usb flash drive and other storag devic have also erod the need for film
camera some applic do howev still exist for the minicamera document such as
map schemat diagram and engin draw frequent cannot be easili copi due
to their size the minicamera is a viabl option for captur the inform on these item
conceal stationari camera with larg roll of film have larg been replac by video
camera film is difficult to replac at hidden sensit site it is also expens to process
videotap is cheap need no process and ca n be record offsit far from the video
cameratransmitt thu even if the target compani discov the hidden video camera
the footag will remain safe in the spy control
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1874 2011 fraud examin manual
infrar film
infrar film ha valu when surveil is done under veri low light or when the spy need
to examin damag or eras document even the content of burn document can be
detect under the right condit with infrar film
digit camera
as digit camera becom smaller in both cost and size thei mai becom a more
formid tool in the corpor spy arsen digit imag ar captur on a small disk
whose content can be load into a comput the imag can be enhanc and manipul
us variou softwar program therebi offer excel resolut the disk carri the
stolen imag can be carri off and on premis with littl chanc of detect
for ani good spy a good digit camera is the mainstai in hi surveil arsen even if
extens aerial photograph ar taken observ of the target site at ground level is
essenti from the ground view mani featur like sign letter on the side of vehicl
the configur of build and street licens plate and other import detail becom
visibl photograph of kei employe of the target can also be valuabl inform in mani
intellig campaign
to avoid attract attent the intellig specialist gener us telescop or reflect
lens to zoom in on detail from a safe distanc in build a visual file on a plant site a
spy will take ground level photograph from around the entir circumfer of the target
area he will even photograph crt and comput screen that ar visibl through window
to aid in analyz photograph at a later date the specialist will catalogu all photograph
as to
subject matter
datetim of dai
direct of shot
number in a sequenc of shot
import featur in shot
thi data can be store in a databas like microsoft access photograph themselv can
be incorpor into the databas by scan them into the comput from a flat glass
scanner or by load them from a digit camera photograph imag excerpt from
videotap surveil aerial photograph and relev diagram document imag or
draw can be also integr into on databas for extens analysi analyt
investig databas like i2 allow for the organ of visual data a databas gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1875
variou narr report chart diagram and chronolog the opportun for an
inform multipli effect ar tremend
cellular telephon
anyon who conduct a sensit or confidenti convers on a cellular telephon is
either highli naiv or plain foolish these transmiss ar transpar to the secret servic
of all govern ani amateur with a receiv can also pick up cellular commun
most corpor spi will as a matter of cours scan cellular frequenc around a target
plant thei will also focu in on cellular telephon call by execut and kei employe by
simpl physic surveil a spy can observ an execut pull out hi cellular telephon in
the car in a restaur or in the groceri store thi will alert the spy to begin monitor the
target cellular frequenc employe should alwai keep in mind that someon could be
listen to their convers sensit inform should not be convei by cellular
phone as with other surveil equip the tool necessari to monitor cellular
telephon convers ar easi to come by
monitor comput eman
digit comput process inform with a seri of 0s and 1s these two digit do not
translat to on and off state but rather to high and low current these current caus
pixel on a comput screen to fire produc high voltag puls that eman into the
surround environ comput eman form a detect and decod pattern a
detector or receiv known as a van eck unit can reproduc keyboard entri on a
comput screen even from a consider distanc
a van eck unit consist of a direct antenna logic circuit and two adjust oscil
on for the vertic and on for the horizont with proper adjust a van park
across the street equip with a van eck receiv can decod the eman from a
keyboard oper insid a neighbor build devic like cpu tape drive disk
drive and commun devic all gener electromagnet radiat which van eck
receiv can detect
to prevent competitor from monitor comput eman organ can shield
their comput equip and transmiss line a process known as tempest while thi
process is us extens in the militari and by certain defens contractor the cost
involv prevent mani privat sector busi from emploi tempest procedur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1876 2011 fraud examin manual
tape record
the best place for a spy to place a tape record is offsit far awai from the microphon a
transmitt locat with the microphon send a signal to an offsit receiv that is
connect to the tape record thi precaut ensur that a compromis of the
microphon will not result in captur of the tape record can also be hook up directli
to telephon in order to record tap phone convers
all that is necessari to creat a crude wireless phone tap is a capacitor to block the dc
voltag from the telephon line wire in seri with a small am or fm transmitt across
the telephon wire pair an am or fm radio plug ged into a tape record pick up the signal
by take the output from the radio audio ja ck a profession would not us thi kind of
tap but a secur investig ha to be on the lookout for the amateur spy too some
employe want to get insid inform to gain an advantag over their cowork
bug the bosss telephon is a good wai to do it
comput system penetr
in some case inform thiev will attempt to extract inform by penetr a
compani comput defens thi can be part of an organ intellig campaign or in
some case it is simpli a random attack by a hacker bent on mischief for more inform
on how outsid attempt to penetr comput system see the comput and internet
fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
