2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/The Technology


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


The Technology 
In determining which technologies to employ, the spy must factor in environmental 
conditions such as lighting (if video surveillance is employed), noise levels, and distance from 
the source. Other factors include the risk of  the sensing device being discovered, power 
supply problems, and access to the device for servicing after installation.  
 
Common electronic eavesdropping devices include: 
• Drop-in telephone bugs  
• Carbon microphones 
• Magnetic or dynamic microphones 
• Electret microphone 
• Spike microphones 
• Cavity microphones 
• Low power consumption transmitters 
• Infinity transmitters  
• Shotgun or parabolic microphones  
• Cellular telephone receivers 
• Video cameras and transmitters 
• Satellite tracking of vehicles 
 
It is not difficult at all for spies to purchase electronic listening equipment. The Internet, for 
example, has a number of sites that advertise vast inventories of equipment ranging from 
audio devices to miniature video cameras to satellite tracking systems. Most of these sites 
urge their customers to use their merchandise only in a legally appropriate manner and 
advertise the equipment for purposes like checking for intruders or ensuring one’s own 
privacy. In truth, however, these devices can and are used by corporate spies to pilfer the 
proprietary secrets of their targets.  
 
Some of the more common forms of surveillance equipment are discussed in the following 
sections.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.865 
SATELLITE TRACKING SYSTEMS 
In most satellite tracking systems, a small transmitter is surreptitiously attached to the 
subject’s vehicle. Common hiding areas include the trunk, inside fenders, or under the rear 
bumper. The transmitter communicates with global positioning satellites (GPS) and converts 
the coordinates of the vehicle onto a map. The spy only needs access to the Internet and a 
password to enter a special, private home page where he can view maps that show the 
vehicle’s location and path. These systems are capable of generating event lists and plain-text 
histories of where the vehicle has traveled. A variation on this tracking design is that in some 
satellite tracking software the system creates a trail of electronic breadcrumbs on the map 
display. The map can be a powerful tool in tracking the movements of executives and key 
company employees.  
 
DROP-IN TELEPHONE BUGS 
Spies frequently use drop-in telephone bugs, which have the advantage of blending in with 
everyday existing telephone equipment. Drop-in bugs are simply inserted into the handset 
device on a normal telephone. The target’s conv ersations are transmitted to a remote 
receiver where they are recorded.  
 
Drop-in bugs are rarely detected because most people never bother to unscrew the plastic 
covers on the handset and perform a detailed check of the internal components. Thus, a 
drop-in telephone bug offers minimal risk of exposure to the spy. When a spy has access to 
the physical premises of a target and wants to be able to listen to conversations on a 
particular telephone line, this device is usually the chosen method of surveillance.  
 
CARBON MICROPHONES 
Carbon microphones, while larger than most spy audio devices, provide good pick-up if 
properly hidden and located. They offer excellent coverage of fixed locations: smoke rooms, 
employee lounges, and other gathering spots. As with other forms of listening equipment, 
these microphones are usually equipped with a transmitter that relays intercepted 
conversations off-site to a recorder. This is much safer, from the spy’s perspective, than 
maintaining a recorder on-site. With a remote transmitter, even if the microphone is 
detected, the recorded material cannot be located or recovered by the target. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.866                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
MAGNETIC AND ELECTRET MICROPHONES 
Magnetic or dynamic microphones can be very  small. They are useful when a microphone 
needs to be close to the speakers and hidden inside something small. Electret microphones 
also provide good close range coverage. Both types of microphones are smaller than the 
standard carbon microphone, though they tend to offer a lower range of coverage. 
 
SPIKE AND CAVITY MICROPHONES 
Spike and cavity microphones work best when the spy has access to an adjoining area and 
needs to penetrate his surveillance into the next room. For example, if a spy has free range in 
a utility room next door or in an adjacent hotel or motel room, a spike microphone can be 
inserted through the adjoining wall to monitor conversations in the target’s room. This type 
of microphone is so small at its insertion point that it is virtually undetectable to the casual 
observer. 
 
INFINITY TRANSMITTERS 
Infinity transmitters are a special kind of device that can be activated from a remote location. 
Once an infinity transmitter has been inserted  in a phone, a spy can call that telephone from 
anywhere in the world and turn it into a listening device. Unknown to the parties present, 
the telephone becomes a hidden microphone. 
 
SHOTGUN OR PARABOLIC MICROPHONES 
For listening to conversations at a long distance, shotgun microphones, parabolic 
microphone devices, and laser audio detection equipment can overhear even quiet 
discussions, provided background noise is not too high. The spy has to be mindful of having 
adequate cover to protect the listening post.  
 
WIRETAPS 
Wiretapping involves splicing a listening or recording device into a wire (such as a telephone 
wire, a PBX cable, an alarm system, or a local area network cable) that is used for 
communication by the target. Standard phone systems, in particular, are very vulnerable to 
wiretapping. Taps are usually placed at the telephone box in the basements of buildings, on 
lines outside buildings, or on telephone pole junction boxes near the target’s offices. The 
different types of wiretaps that can be utilized include: hardwired wiretap, soft wiretap, 
record wiretap, and transmit wiretap. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.867 



:


the technolog
in determin which technolog to emploi the spy must factor in environment
condit such as light if video surveil is emploi nois level and distanc from
the sourc other factor includ the risk of the sens devic be discov power
suppli problem and access to the devic for servic after instal
common electron eavesdrop devic includ
dropin telephon bug
carbon microphon
magnet or dynam microphon
electret microphon
spike microphon
caviti microphon
low power consumpt transmitt
infin transmitt
shotgun or parabol microphon
cellular telephon receiv
video camera and transmitt
satellit track of vehicl
it is not difficult at all for spi to purchas electron listen equip the internet for
exampl ha a number of site that advertis vast inventori of equip rang from
audio devic to miniatur video camera to satellit track system most of these site
urg their custom to us their merchandis onli in a legal appropri manner and
advertis the equip for purpos like check for intrud or ensur on own
privaci in truth howev these devic can and ar us by corpor spi to pilfer the
proprietari secret of their target
some of the more common form of surveil equip ar discuss in the follow
section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1865
satellit track system
in most satellit track system a small transmitt is surreptiti attach to the
subject vehicl common hide area includ the trunk insid fender or under the rear
bumper the transmitt commun with global posit satellit gp and convert
the coordin of the vehicl onto a map the spy onli need access to the internet and a
password to enter a special privat home page where he can view map that show the
vehicl locat and path these system ar capabl of gener event list and plaintext
histori of where the vehicl ha travel a variat on thi track design is that in some
satellit track softwar the system creat a trail of electron breadcrumb on the map
displai the map can be a power tool in track the movement of execut and kei
compani employe
dropin telephon bug
spi frequent us dropin telephon bug which have the advantag of blend in with
everydai exist telephon equip dropin bug ar simpli insert into the handset
devic on a normal telephon the target conv ersat ar transmit to a remot
receiv where thei ar record
dropin bug ar rare detect becaus most peopl never bother to unscrew the plastic
cover on the handset and perform a detail check of the intern compon thu a
dropin telephon bug offer minim risk of exposur to the spy when a spy ha access to
the physic premis of a target and want to be abl to listen to convers on a
particular telephon line thi devic is usual the chosen method of surveil
carbon microphon
carbon microphon while larger than most spy audio devic provid good pickup if
properli hidden and locat thei offer excel coverag of fix locat smoke room
employe loung and other gather spot as with other form of listen equip
these microphon ar usual equip with a transmitt that relai intercept
convers offsit to a record thi is much safer from the spy perspect than
maintain a record onsit with a remot transmitt even if the microphon is
detect the record materi cannot be locat or recov by the target
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1866 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet and electret microphon
magnet or dynam microphon can be veri small thei ar us when a microphon
need to be close to the speaker and hidden insid someth small electret microphon
also provid good close rang coverag both type of microphon ar smaller than the
standard carbon microphon though thei tend to offer a lower rang of coverag
spike and caviti microphon
spike and caviti microphon work best when the spy ha access to an adjoin area and
need to penetr hi surveil into the next room for exampl if a spy ha free rang in
a util room next door or in an adjac hotel or motel room a spike microphon can be
insert through the adjoin wall to monitor convers in the target room thi type
of microphon is so small at it insert point that it is virtual undetect to the casual
observ
infin transmitt
infin transmitt ar a special kind of devic that can be activ from a remot locat
onc an infin transmitt ha been insert in a phone a spy can call that telephon from
anywher in the world and turn it into a listen devic unknown to the parti present
the telephon becom a hidden microphon
shotgun or parabol microphon
for listen to convers at a long distanc shotgun microphon parabol
microphon devic and laser audio detect equip can overhear even quiet
discuss provid background nois is not too high the spy ha to be mind of have
adequ cover to protect the listen post
wiretap
wiretap involv splice a listen or record devic into a wire such as a telephon
wire a pbx cabl an alarm system or a local area network cabl that is us for
commun by the target standard phone system in particular ar veri vulner to
wiretap tap ar usual place at the telephon box in the basement of build on
line outsid build or on telephon pole junction box near the target offic the
differ type of wiretap that can be util includ hardwir wiretap soft wiretap
record wiretap and transmit wiretap
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1867
