2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Preliminary Search Procedures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Preliminary Search Procedures 
If an organization suspects that wiretapping has occurred, there are a number of preliminary 
search procedures that the layperson can perform. This section is not designed to make the 
reader an expert at counter-surveillance techniques; professionals who offer those services 
can easily be located. However, it is quite feasible for an ordinary person to conduct a basic 
search for wiretapping equipment. When conducting an inspection for electronic 
surveillance equipment, be mindful of safety concerns. Never reach into electrical boxes or 
outlets unless you are sure the power is off, and do not grasp bare wires unless you know 
they are not live. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.870                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KNOW YOUR DEVICES 
Wiretapping devices, for the most part, look like hobbyist electronic circuit boards. The 
major difference is that they are much smaller than the circuit boards of the past. Satellite 
tracking equipment is usually housed in small metal boxes about the size of a paperback 
book. They require small antennae that have to face toward the sky.  
 
INSPECTING TELEPHONES 
If the mouthpieces or earpieces on telephone handsets have screw-off plastic covers, remove 
them and make sure no transmitters or unusual looking components are attached to the 
microphone condensers. Also examine the markings on the condenser unit. Do they match a 
condenser from a similar telephone kept in a secure area? If the markings are significantly 
different, have them checked by a representative from the telephone manufacturer. 
 
If the cover on the handset is one solid piece of plastic, look at the two screws that hold the 
plastic plate on. If the screws have scratches on them (e.g., from a screwdriver) remove the 
screws and take the plate off. Examine the condensers for signs of tampering or for 
miniature transmitters.  
 
Examine the back or underside of the telephones. Look for unusual components taped or 
held by a magnet to the back metal plate. Also look for unusual wires protruding from the 
phone. (This means any wires other than the regular plastic sheathed cord that is found on 
all telephones.) If these examinations are negative, then the telephone is probably secure.  
 
If you still suspect the presence of a listening device, do not attempt to disassemble the main 
part of the telephone. You may damage the unit. Instead, look at the screws holding down 
the main body of the phone to the metal plate. If those screws show signs of tampering, 
have someone from the manufacturer examine the unit. 
 
It is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephone attaches to the wall. 
Carefully remove the cover and check for any electronic components inside. In a normal 
wall box, you should only see wires and screw points where the wires are tied together. 
Extraneous components could be electronic listening devices. If you are not sure whether 
the item you have identified is actually a transmitter or microphone, contact a qualified 
                                                          
2 The Granite Island Group, a technical surveillance countermeasures firm, provides photographs of some 
electronic surveillance equipment on its website. (www.tscm.com/whatistscm.html) 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.871 
countermeasures expert, the phone company, or a representative from the phone 
manufacturer.  
 
INTERFACE BOX 
The interface box is a gray box typically located on the side of the building. If a business 
operates in a multiple occupancy structure, the interface box may be located in a utility closet 
close to the company’s offices. In order to ex amine the interface box, unscrew the side of 
the box that is designed for customer access. Look inside with a flashlight. All wiring in the 
box should look the same, using the colors red, blue, green, yellow, and black. You might see 
some striped wires, but that is fine. There should also be a line coming into the side of the 
box from the telephone company. What you should be looking for is a transmitter or some 
form of unusual wiring that does not appear to come from the telephone company and does 
not lead into your building or office. This could indicate a wiretap. 
 
ABOVE THE CEILING 
If an open space exists above the ceiling in your offices, access that area and look around 
with a flashlight. Be on the lookout for everything from sophisticated transmitters to tape 
recorders that are crudely hooked into telephone lines. If listening devices have been placed 
in an attic or in a crawl space above the ceiling, they probably have not been elaborately 
camouflaged. It should not be exceedingly difficult to spot surveillance equipment in these 
areas.  
 
It is a good idea to have the lights turned on in the room below while you search overhead. 
If someone has drilled holes in the ceiling to insert a microphone, the light should shine 
through the ceiling and you will be able to detect the holes. Surveillance personnel frequently 
drill multiple holes before selecting just one as a listening spot or inserting a miniature video 
camera.  
 
OTHER PLACES TO SEARCH 
Use a flashlight to look through the grill panels covering all air conditioning ducts for 
transmitters or listening devices. Carefully inspect all electrical outlets by removing the cover 
plates and looking inside with a flashlight. Examine any central utility closets for unusual 
wiring and electronic devices. Look for signs of  debris on the floor under outlets or light 
switches; this might indicate that someone has removed the wall plates to insert a listening 
device. Any time ducts, outlet plates, light fixtures, or similar items have been searched and 
replaced, their orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.872                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
markers. By shining an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have 
been removed. This technique makes it much easier to determine if someone has tampered 
with those items since the last search.  
 
Look under desks and tables in all office spaces  for electronic devices or wires that seem out 
of place. Do not tear your office apart while conducting your search; feel your way around 
and explore with your hands. Look under and behind couches and sofas. It is especially 
important to closely examine furniture in areas where people are likely to sit and chat. The 
tables and credenzas in meeting rooms should be checked on a regular basis.  
 
Check any television sets, radios, lamps, telephones, computers, clocks, smoke detectors, or 
sprinkler heads in the room. If any areas are served by cable TV, be sure to check out the 
cable lines, converter box, line splitters, and connectors for anything that seems out of place. 
Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed, as unused wiring 
can be used for eavesdropping. 
 
COMPUTERS 
Always check the back of computers for monitoring devices taped to the back panel. 
Examine all connections between the computer and the outside world: lines to printers, 
network cables, lines to peripheral devices, or lines to monitors. Pay attention to any 
connectors that have been placed between the computer and its external lines. These 
connectors may look like they perform a legitimate function, but if the external line could 
have been plugged directly into the computer, find out why the interface was inserted and 
who put it there. 
 
The area immediately around the computer should be checked for unusual wiring, electronic 
boxes, or devices. Any closets or rooms dedicated to housing network equipment such as 
hubs, routers, cabling rigs, or network monitoring gear needs close examination by a 
qualified network technician to make sure no alien electronic devices are present.  
 



:


preliminari search procedur
if an organ suspect that wiretap ha occur there ar a number of preliminari
search procedur that the layperson can perform thi section is not design to make the
reader an expert at countersurveil techniqu profession who offer those servic
can easili be locat howev it is quit feasibl for an ordinari person to conduct a basic
search for wiretap equip when conduct an inspect for electron
surveil equip be mind of safeti concern never reach into electr box or
outlet unless you ar sure the power is off and do not grasp bare wire unless you know
thei ar not live
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1870 2011 fraud examin manual
know your devic
wiretap devic for the most part look like hobbyist electron circuit board the
major differ is that thei ar much smaller than the circuit board of the past satellit
track equip is usual hous in small metal box about the size of a paperback
book thei requir small antenna that have to face toward the sky
inspect telephon
if the mouthpiec or earpiec on telephon handset have screwoff plastic cover remov
them and make sure no transmitt or unusu look compon ar attach to the
microphon condens also examin the mark on the condens unit do thei match a
condens from a similar telephon kept in a secur area if the mark ar significantli
differ have them check by a repres from the telephon manufactur
if the cover on the handset is on solid piec of plastic look at the two screw that hold the
plastic plate on if the screw have scratch on them eg from a screwdriv remov the
screw and take the plate off examin the condens for sign of tamper or for
miniatur transmitt
examin the back or undersid of the telephon look for unusu compon tape or
held by a magnet to the back metal plate also look for unusu wire protrud from the
phone thi mean ani wire other than the regular plastic sheath cord that is found on
all telephon if these examin ar neg then the telephon is probabl secur
if you still suspect the presenc of a listen devic do not attempt to disassembl the main
part of the telephon you mai damag the unit instead look at the screw hold down
the main bodi of the phone to the metal plate if those screw show sign of tamper
have someon from the manufactur examin the unit
it is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephon attach to the wall
carefulli remov the cover and check for ani electron compon insid in a normal
wall box you should onli see wire and screw point where the wire ar ti togeth
extran compon could be electron listen devic if you ar not sure whether
the item you have identifi is actual a transmitt or microphon contact a qualifi
2 the granit island group a technic surveil countermeasur firm provid photograph of some
electron surveil equip on it websit wwwtscmcomwhatistscmhtml
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1871
countermeasur expert the phone compani or a repres from the phone
manufactur
interfac box
the interfac box is a grai box typic locat on the side of the build if a busi
oper in a multipl occup structur the interfac box mai be locat in a util closet
close to the compani offic in order to ex amin the interfac box unscrew the side of
the box that is design for custom access look insid with a flashlight all wire in the
box should look the same us the color red blue green yellow and black you might see
some stripe wire but that is fine there should also be a line come into the side of the
box from the telephon compani what you should be look for is a transmitt or some
form of unusu wire that doe not appear to come from the telephon compani and doe
not lead into your build or offic thi could indic a wiretap
abov the ceil
if an open space exist abov the ceil in your offic access that area and look around
with a flashlight be on the lookout for everyth from sophist transmitt to tape
record that ar crude hook into telephon line if listen devic have been place
in an attic or in a crawl space abov the ceil thei probabl have not been elabor
camouflag it should not be exceedingli difficult to spot surveil equip in these
area
it is a good idea to have the light turn on in the room below while you search overhead
if someon ha drill hole in the ceil to insert a microphon the light should shine
through the ceil and you will be abl to detect the hole surveil personnel frequent
drill multipl hole befor select just on as a listen spot or insert a miniatur video
camera
other place to search
us a flashlight to look through the grill panel cover all air condit duct for
transmitt or listen devic carefulli inspect all electr outlet by remov the cover
plate and look insid with a flashlight examin ani central util closet for unusu
wire and electron devic look for sign of debri on the floor under outlet or light
switch thi might indic that someon ha remov the wall plate to insert a listen
devic ani time duct outlet plate light fixtur or similar item have been search and
replac their orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1872 2011 fraud examin manual
marker by shine an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have
been remov thi techniqu make it much easier to determin if someon ha tamper
with those item sinc the last search
look under desk and tabl in all offic space for electron devic or wire that seem out
of place do not tear your offic apart while conduct your search feel your wai around
and explor with your hand look under and behind couch and sofa it is especi
import to close examin furnitur in area where peopl ar like to sit and chat the
tabl and credenza in meet room should be check on a regular basi
check ani televis set radio lamp telephon comput clock smoke detector or
sprinkler head in the room if ani area ar serv by cabl tv be sure to check out the
cabl line convert box line splitter and connector for anyth that seem out of place
ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov as unus wire
can be us for eavesdrop
comput
alwai check the back of comput for monitor devic tape to the back panel
examin all connect between the comput and the outsid world line to printer
network cabl line to peripher devic or line to monitor pai attent to ani
connector that have been place between the comput and it extern line these
connector mai look like thei perform a legitim function but if the extern line could
have been plug directli into the comput find out why the interfac wa insert and
who put it there
the area immedi around the comput should be check for unusu wire electron
box or devic ani closet or room dedic to hous network equip such as
hub router cabl rig or network monitor gear need close examin by a
qualifi network technician to make sure no alien electron devic ar present
