2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI) 
Companies should develop a program for safeguarding proprietary information  (SPI). Businesses 
should seek out a corporate information officer (CIO) to develop and manage an SPI 
program. An alternative is to hire a security management consultant to develop a program 
and then maintain it on a yearly basis. In either case, the CIO should have information 
management skills and be knowledgeable about trade secret protection.  
 
Task Force 
To coordinate a companywide SPI program, a task force should be assembled. The task 
force should include managers and staff from departments that deal with proprietary 
information such as research and development, and production. The team should also 
include representatives from corporate security, human resources, records management, data 
processing, and legal. 
 
The process should begin by determining what information should be protected. The task 
force should identify those areas that give the company its competitive edge, such as quality 
of the product, service, price, manufacturing technology, marketing, and distribution. One 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.879 
way of accomplishing this is to ask the team, “If you were our competitor, what information 
would you like to know?”  
 
Once these sensitive areas have been identified, the primary focus should be on the 
information security procedures for each department. They should identify where 
proprietary information is kept and survey the risk if such information is lost to  
a competitor. 
 
Employee Awareness 
An effective program must educate employees about security awareness. Employees should 
understand that their professional growth and well-being depends on the success of the 
company. It should be made clear that the success of the company is directly tied to the 
protection of information and data. Employees should be taught how to respond to 
telephone information requests. A procedure should be set out whereby information 
requests are sent to public relations or some other department. 
 
Nondocumentary communications should also be protected. Employees need to know that 
they are accountable for what they say, whether it be over the phone or at a social gathering. 
Employees should never discuss confidential business information at airports, restaurants, or 
any place they could be overheard. They should also be instructed about using a laptop 
computer wherever there may be a chance it could be read in public by someone “shoulder 
surfing.” 
 
Regular reminders of the importance of information security should be published regularly 
in company newsletters, on bulletin boards, or in memos. 
 
Nondisclosure Agreements 
All employees should sign a nondisclosure agreement. Everyone involved with the company 
should sign such an agreement, including subcontractors and their employees, clerical staff, 
consultants, and temporaries. Besides the legal value, a comprehensive nondisclosure 
agreement sends a signal to employees that the company has a tough attitude toward 
preventing leaks. It might also be necessary to have suppliers and distributors sign 
nondisclosure agreements. Although suppliers and distributors have to receive information 
about certain aspects of a business, employees dealing with them should be made aware of the 
potential for misuse of the information and should be instructed to provide them with only 
the information that is essential for them to do their jobs. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.880                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Document Classification 
Document classification is also an important area in a protection plan. Working closely with 
each department, proprietary documents should be classified according to the level of 
security that best meets the company’s need s. For instance, documents may be labeled 
“private” for personnel matters and move up to “restricted” for pricing or marketing 
information. Trade secrets or highly sensitive information might be labeled “authorized 
access only.” Notes and drafts of documents should also be safeguarded or destroyed when 
the final document is completed. 
 
Visitors
Visitor access should be closely monitored. Visitors should be required to sign in and out in 
a logbook, and they must be escorted by their host at all times and should not be allowed 
into areas where there might be sensitive information. 
 
Offices 
Engineering and executive offices should always be locked to discourage browsing, theft, or 
the planting of an eavesdropping device. Keys to office doors should be kept secure. 
Keeping proprietary information and computer disks in locked cabinets greatly reduces the 
risk of theft. 
 
Maintenance Workers 
Management should designate security personnel or someone to monitor maintenance work 
done in areas in which there might be sensitive information. We have all seen scenes in 
movies where the hero, or villain, gains access to confidential information by walking into a 
building or office posing as a maintenance worker.  
 
Meeting Rooms 
Paging systems, background music speakers, and unused wiring can be used for eaves-
 dropping. Any electronic items and wiring that are not essential should be removed. A 
mirror and a light affixed to a flexible handle can be used to search for recording and 
transmitting devices in air ducts. After the search, when the duct grills are replaced, their 
orientation and screw-head positions can be designated with ultra-violet markers. By shining 
an ultra-violet light on the screws, it is easy to tell if the panels have been removed. Meeting 
rooms should be locked when not in use. If blackboards or flip charts are used, they should 
not face the windows, or the blinds should be closed to prevent observation from telescopes 
or binoculars. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.881 
Quiet Rooms 
A “quiet room” may cost anywhere from $15,000 to $200,000, but the cost may be justified 
depending on the risk involved. A quiet room is acoustically shielded and radio-frequency 
shielded. The room can also be equipped with intrusion monitoring sensors and closed-circuit 
television cameras. 
 
Communications Equipment 
Cellular or cordless telephones must not be used to discuss sensitive business matters. These 
devices are radio transmitters and are frequently monitored by both hobbyists and 
professional information brokers. 
 
Electronic Mail and Voicemail 
For knowledgeable hackers, e-mail and voicemail systems are easy targets. 
 
Confidential information should not be left on a voicemail system. Likewise, it should never 
be left on a home answering machine. Hotels often offer voicemail for their guests. These 
systems require no passwords to gain access to and should never be used for sensitive 
information. Author Michael Stedman reports that when he wanted to interview Robert 
Gates, the former director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), he called the hotel 
where Gates was staying and was given a room number. Stedman said he was astonished 
when he punched the room number into the phone and suddenly found himself listening to 
Gate’s messages that had been left on the hotel’s voicemail service. 
 
To prevent this kind of espionage, instruct staff, family, and friends to never leave anything 
but routine messages on voicemail. Tell them to only leave return numbers, or better yet, use 
a beeper or pager. Make sure voicemail is cleaned out daily. 
 
Computer Systems 
Passwords are the most common defense against computer intrusion, but to be effective, 
they must be used along with good control procedures. Passwords should be as complex as 
the user can memorize, but never less than six random alphanumeric characters. The 
company must change passwords regularly and close them out as soon as an employee leaves 
the organization. Management should train em ployees to log off terminals before leaving 
them unattended. The company can also install an automatic log-off program whereby a 
terminal that is not in use for a certain number of minutes will be automatically logged off. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.882                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A secure encryption device can be employed to protect confidential files, especially when 
transmitting them by modem. Encryption techniques found in popular software packages 
available at a local computer store are probably not secure enough. These programs are in 
wide use and are usually no match for a sophisticated hacker. If files are not encrypted, they 
may be vulnerable to anyone with access to your computer.  
 
A company should also consider the use of virus scanning software. One of the best 
safeguards against viruses or any other kind of data loss is to have a secure backup 
procedure.  
 
Many companies have not yet figured out what to do with the electronic data stored in their 
systems. While some form of paperwork filing or shredding system may be in place, often 
electronic information is organized according to each user’s personal system and deleted 
only when the individual chooses to do so. Even when files are deleted, savvy computer 
experts can often re-create the erased material. This means that everything sent through the 
computer from a birthday greeting to a “smoking gun” document is being preserved. 
 
This is potentially crippling in the event of a lawsuit. Lawyers are becoming aware of the 
storage of data and are requesting electronic evidence in many cases. Lawyers, pouring 
through backups of documents long ago thought deleted, find incriminating memos such as 
“I know this may be illegal, but do it anyway,” or “Please destroy this evidence.” Often such 
documents result in the case being settled for more than it may really be worth because the 
company does not want to run the risk that such documents will inflame the jury into 
awarding large punitive damages. 
 
Companies should institute procedures for deciding what should be kept and what 
shouldn’t. Also, backup files should be kept under lock and key. One 8mm tape can hold as 
much as 1,500 boxes of information. Anyone can grab such a tape and easily sneak it out of 
the building. 
 
Faxing Documents 
Sensitive documents should not be sent through the fax machine unless both machines are 
equipped with a high-level encryption device. Some fax machines are equipped with a 
storage and retrieval system similar to that of voicemail systems. From a remote number, 
you enter a PIN number and stored faxes can be sent to another machine. This allows a 
competitor to be able to retrieve those faxes as well. 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.883 
Video Encryption 
Teleconferencing is growing in popularity. Unfortunately, satellite teleconferencing signals 
can be received by millions of home satellite dish owners, some of whom have deliberately 
tuned in to find out things they shouldn’t. Teleconferencing should only be used when there 
is an encryption system in place that will fully scramble both the video and audio signals. 
 
Corporate Telephone Exchanges 
Private branch exchanges (PBXs) are located in a company’s tel ephone closet where wires, 
mounted neatly and predictably upon row after row, lead to corporate executives’ offices and 
other areas of interest to competitors. These rooms should be, but seldom are, locked and 
physically secured. People with tool belts go in and out with little notice from anyone. 
Keeping the eavesdropper out is easier than trying to detect his handiwork.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In one case, a surveillance team found that an executive’s phone line had been tampered 
with. They installed a motion detector in the telephone closet. The alarm sent report-only 
signals to an alarm central station. After two weeks, the central station’s records revealed a 
pattern of early morning visits to the closet  on Mondays and Thursdays. Surveillance was 
set up and the eavesdropper was caught. 
 
Another good idea is to have an escort for anyone entering the area. The identity of the 
worker should also be verified. 
 
Computer-driven PBXs or switches present numerous opportunities for eavesdropping. 
Using an on-site or off-site control terminal, the information thief can hide invisible wiretaps 
among millions of software instruction codes. The hidden codes, for example, could cause a 
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and terminate into a hidden tape 
recorder. 
 
An appropriately trained investigator should regularly print out the user configuration 
instructions. Paying particular attention to those extensions that are likely to be of interest to 
eavesdroppers, the investigator can look for modified instruction codes.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.884                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Trade Shows and Public Events 
Sales materials, trade show exhibits, and the text of speeches should be carefully reviewed 
for information that a competitor might find useful. Employees should be instructed not to 
say anything to anyone that they would not say directly to a competitor. During shows, 
employees should not leave demonstration materials or sensitive documents unattended. 
New design models have been stolen during their transportation in or out of a show. 
 
Foreign Travel 
Corporate executives traveling out of the country should be especially cautious. Many 
foreign governments are unleashing huge and sophisticated intelligence gathering operations. 
Executives should use encryption systems on all voice, fax, or modem transmissions. They 
should also assume that their rooms are bugged and act accordingly. 
 
 



:


program for safeguard proprietari inform spi
compani should develop a program for safeguard proprietari inform spi busi
should seek out a corpor inform offic cio to develop and manag an spi
program an altern is to hire a secur manag consult to develop a program
and then maintain it on a yearli basi in either case the cio should have inform
manag skill and be knowledg about trade secret protect
task forc
to coordin a companywid spi program a task forc should be assembl the task
forc should includ manag and staff from depart that deal with proprietari
inform such as research and develop and product the team should also
includ repres from corpor secur human resourc record manag data
process and legal
the process should begin by determin what inform should be protect the task
forc should identifi those area that give the compani it competit edg such as qualiti
of the product servic price manufactur technolog market and distribut on
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1879
wai of accomplish thi is to ask the team if you were our competitor what inform
would you like to know
onc these sensit area have been identifi the primari focu should be on the
inform secur procedur for each depart thei should identifi where
proprietari inform is kept and survei the risk if such inform is lost to
a competitor
employe awar
an effect program must educ employe about secur awar employe should
understand that their profession growth and wellb depend on the success of the
compani it should be made clear that the success of the compani is directli ti to the
protect of inform and data employe should be taught how to respond to
telephon inform request a procedur should be set out wherebi inform
request ar sent to public relat or some other depart
nondocumentari commun should also be protect employe need to know that
thei ar account for what thei sai whether it be over the phone or at a social gather
employe should never discuss confidenti busi inform at airport restaur or
ani place thei could be overheard thei should also be instruct about us a laptop
comput wherev there mai be a chanc it could be read in public by someon shoulder
surf
regular remind of the import of inform secur should be publish regularli
in compani newslett on bulletin board or in memo
nondisclosur agreement
all employe should sign a nondisclosur agreement everyon involv with the compani
should sign such an agreement includ subcontractor and their employe cleric staff
consult and temporari besid the legal valu a comprehens nondisclosur
agreement send a signal to employe that the compani ha a tough attitud toward
prevent leak it might also be necessari to have supplier and distributor sign
nondisclosur agreement although supplier and distributor have to receiv inform
about certain aspect of a busi employe deal with them should be made awar of the
potenti for misus of the inform and should be instruct to provid them with onli
the inform that is essenti for them to do their job
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1880 2011 fraud examin manual
document classif
document classif is also an import area in a protect plan work close with
each depart proprietari document should be classifi accord to the level of
secur that best meet the compani need s for instanc document mai be label
privat for personnel matter and move up to restrict for price or market
inform trade secret or highli sensit inform might be label author
access onli note and draft of document should also be safeguard or destroi when
the final document is complet
visitor
visitor access should be close monitor visitor should be requir to sign in and out in
a logbook and thei must be escort by their host at all time and should not be allow
into area where there might be sensit inform
offic
engin and execut offic should alwai be lock to discourag brows theft or
the plant of an eavesdrop devic kei to offic door should be kept secur
keep proprietari inform and comput disk in lock cabinet greatli reduc the
risk of theft
mainten worker
manag should design secur personnel or someon to monitor mainten work
done in area in which there might be sensit inform we have all seen scene in
movi where the hero or villain gain access to confidenti inform by walk into a
build or offic pose as a mainten worker
meet room
page system background music speaker and unus wire can be us for eav
drop ani electron item and wire that ar not essenti should be remov a
mirror and a light affix to a flexibl handl can be us to search for record and
transmit devic in air duct after the search when the duct grill ar replac their
orient and screwhead posit can be design with ultraviolet marker by shine
an ultraviolet light on the screw it is easi to tell if the panel have been remov meet
room should be lock when not in us if blackboard or flip chart ar us thei should
not face the window or the blind should be close to prevent observ from telescop
or binocular
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1881
quiet room
a quiet room mai cost anywher from 15000 to 200000 but the cost mai be justifi
depend on the risk involv a quiet room is acoust shield and radiofrequ
shield the room can also be equip with intrus monitor sensor and closedcircuit
televis camera
commun equip
cellular or cordless telephon must not be us to discuss sensit busi matter these
devic ar radio transmitt and ar frequent monitor by both hobbyist and
profession inform broker
electron mail and voicemail
for knowledg hacker email and voicemail system ar easi target
confidenti inform should not be left on a voicemail system likewis it should never
be left on a home answer machin hotel often offer voicemail for their guest these
system requir no password to gain access to and should never be us for sensit
inform author michael stedman report that when he want to interview robert
gate the former director of the us central intellig agenc cia he call the hotel
where gate wa stai and wa given a room number stedman said he wa astonish
when he punch the room number into the phone and suddenli found himself listen to
gate messag that had been left on the hotel voicemail servic
to prevent thi kind of espionag instruct staff famili and friend to never leav anyth
but routin messag on voicemail tell them to onli leav return number or better yet us
a beeper or pager make sure voicemail is clean out daili
comput system
password ar the most common defens against comput intrus but to be effect
thei must be us along with good control procedur password should be as complex as
the user can memor but never less than six random alphanumer charact the
compani must chang password regularli and close them out as soon as an employe leav
the organ manag should train em ploye to log off termin befor leav
them unattend the compani can also instal an automat logoff program wherebi a
termin that is not in us for a certain number of minut will be automat log off
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1882 2011 fraud examin manual
a secur encrypt devic can be emploi to protect confidenti file especi when
transmit them by modem encrypt techniqu found in popular softwar packag
avail at a local comput store ar probabl not secur enough these program ar in
wide us and ar usual no match for a sophist hacker if file ar not encrypt thei
mai be vulner to anyon with access to your comput
a compani should also consid the us of viru scan softwar on of the best
safeguard against virus or ani other kind of data loss is to have a secur backup
procedur
mani compani have not yet figur out what to do with the electron data store in their
system while some form of paperwork file or shred system mai be in place often
electron inform is organ accord to each user person system and delet
onli when the individu choos to do so even when file ar delet savvi comput
expert can often recreat the eras materi thi mean that everyth sent through the
comput from a birthdai greet to a smoke gun document is be preserv
thi is potenti crippl in the event of a lawsuit lawyer ar becom awar of the
storag of data and ar request electron evid in mani case lawyer pour
through backup of document long ago thought delet find incrimin memo such as
i know thi mai be illeg but do it anywai or pleas destroi thi evid often such
document result in the case be settl for more than it mai realli be worth becaus the
compani doe not want to run the risk that such document will inflam the juri into
award larg punit damag
compani should institut procedur for decid what should be kept and what
shouldnt also backup file should be kept under lock and kei on 8mm tape can hold as
much as 1500 box of inform anyon can grab such a tape and easili sneak it out of
the build
fax document
sensit document should not be sent through the fax machin unless both machin ar
equip with a highlevel encrypt devic some fax machin ar equip with a
storag and retriev system similar to that of voicemail system from a remot number
you enter a pin number and store fax can be sent to anoth machin thi allow a
competitor to be abl to retriev those fax as well
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1883
video encrypt
teleconferenc is grow in popular unfortun satellit teleconferenc signal
can be receiv by million of home satellit dish owner some of whom have deliber
tune in to find out thing thei shouldnt teleconferenc should onli be us when there
is an encrypt system in place that will fulli scrambl both the video and audio signal
corpor telephon exchang
privat branch exchang pbx ar locat in a compani tel ephon closet where wire
mount neatli and predict upon row after row lead to corpor execut offic and
other area of interest to competitor these room should be but seldom ar lock and
physic secur peopl with tool belt go in and out with littl notic from anyon
keep the eavesdropp out is easier than try to detect hi handiwork
exampl
in on case a surveil team found that an execut phone line had been tamper
with thei instal a motion detector in the telephon closet the alarm sent reportonli
signal to an alarm central station after two week the central station record reveal a
pattern of earli morn visit to the closet on mondai and thursdai surveil wa
set up and the eavesdropp wa caught
anoth good idea is to have an escort for anyon enter the area the ident of the
worker should also be verifi
computerdriven pbx or switch present numer opportun for eavesdrop
us an onsit or offsit control termin the inform thief can hide invis wiretap
among million of softwar instruct code the hidden code for exampl could caus a
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and termin into a hidden tape
record
an appropri train investig should regularli print out the user configur
instruct pai particular attent to those extens that ar like to be of interest to
eavesdropp the investig can look for modifi instruct code
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1884 2011 fraud examin manual
trade show and public event
sale materi trade show exhibit and the text of speech should be carefulli review
for inform that a competitor might find us employe should be instruct not to
sai anyth to anyon that thei would not sai directli to a competitor dure show
employe should not leav demonstr materi or sensit document unattend
new design model have been stolen dure their transport in or out of a show
foreign travel
corpor execut travel out of the countri should be especi cautiou mani
foreign govern ar unleash huge and sophist intellig gather oper
execut should us encrypt system on all voic fax or modem transmiss thei
should also assum that their room ar bug and act accordingli
