2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Preventing Employee Theft of Proprietary Information 
A company can spend years developing a competitive advantage over its competitors. That 
advantage can be eliminated in an instant by employees walking out the door. 
 
When employees leave a company, there is usually little if any attention paid to where they 
go afterwards. However, if a company begins to notice that a rival is suddenly taking away its 
business, it should sit up and take notice. Often employees leave one company for another, 
and take with them the knowledge of how that particular company operates, its pricing 
policies, its manufacturing methods, its customers, and so on. When employees share what 
they have learned with a competitor, the competitive edge is lost. 
 
Today’s work force is extremely mobile. Employees rarely start with one company and stay 
until retirement. On top of that, companies are continually downsizing and laying off 
employees. In most cases, experienced employees have little choice but to go to work for a 
competitor or begin consulting in their field. Cutbacks and firings do little to foster an 
attitude of loyalty among employees. 
 
Employee Awareness 
Employees must be educated as to what information is proprietary. It is hard to protect 
something if no one knows what needs protecting. A secret formula may be easy to identify, 
but employees are often not aware that subjects they may be discussing over lunch in a 
crowded restaurant are also trade secrets that would prove invaluable to a competitor. It 
does not help that the courts and legal scholars cannot decide on what constitutes 
proprietary information. Definitions of what is a trade secret depend on the organization and 
the industry. Examples of trade secrets include everything from notes in the margin of an 
employee manual to a procedure for tying a fishing lure. In addition, different jurisdictions 
have different laws defining what can or cannot potentially be a trade secret.  
 
Generally, to establish a trade secret, a company has to show that the information is not 
known in the industry, that the company has made efforts to keep it confidential, and that 
the information gives the company some sort of competitive edge. Just because information 
is confidential, does not make it a trade secret under the law. However, even though 
information may not be a “trade secret” as that term is defined under the statutes, it should 
be protected by employees. Again, the best test for deciding what is confidential information is 
to ask yourself if the information would provide an advantage to the competition.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.887 
Nondisclosure and Noncompetition Agreements 
A nondisclosure agreement is a written agreement that employees should sign as soon as 
they start work. It usually provides that all proprietary, confidential, or trade secret 
information the employees learn must be kept confidential and must not be disclosed to 
anyone. A noncompetition agreement is an agreement whereby the employees agree not to 
work for competing companies within a certain period of time after leaving.  
 
General Motors Corporation began requiring its senior-level executives to sign these 
agreements shortly after a well-publicized case against one of the company’s former 
purchasing executives. GM accused the executive  of taking millions of dollars worth of 
proprietary information to his new employer, Volkswagen. GM accused him of pushing up 
strategy meetings before he left so that he could gather even more data. The employee 
denied the charges. GM concluded after this happened that the use of noncompetition 
agreements could help prevent a similar occurrence. 
 
However, the use of nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements is not an overall 
solution. There are several legal problems with using these agreements. As mentioned earlier, 
there is no clear definition of what constitutes a trade secret. In some instances it can be 
extremely difficult to determine what belongs to the company and what belongs to the 
employee. 
 
Noncompetition agreements also have a variety of problems. First, courts in some 
jurisdictions have held that such agreements are against “public policy” because they limit 
the future employment of a person; theref ore, in these jurisdictions noncompetition 
agreements are unenforceable. Others uphold the agreements, but only if they are part of an 
otherwise valid employment agreement. In these cases, the employment agreement and the 
noncompetition agreement must be signed at the same time or the noncompetition 
agreement is unenforceable. In addition, if the employee is an “at will” employee who is not 
covered by an employment agreement, any noncompetition signed by such an employee 
would be unenforceable. 
 
Although nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements can be excellent tools for 
preventing the loss of confidential information to competitors, their use is limited, and legal 
counsel familiar with employment laws for the specific jurisdiction should be consulted. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.888                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
However, many professionals say that the real value of such agreements is not their legal 
power, but their ability to create the right image. This includes making certain that 
employees and outsiders clearly understand that the company is serious about preventing the 
loss of proprietary information and will do everything they can to pursue those individuals 
who are stealing information. 
 
Make Sure Employees Know When Not to Speak 
Often, employees are willing to abide by nondisclosure agreements, but they do not 
understand that the information they are communicating may be confidential. For instance, a 
software company employee who worked on product updates attended a trade association 
meeting and entertained the other attendees with war stories about the development process 
and what things worked and what didn’t. The employee was later reprimanded, and seemed 
genuinely unaware that the information he had provided was proprietary information of 
great value to the company’s competitors. 
 
Exit Interviews
One of the most effective ways to protect a company’s trade secrets and confidential 
business information is to conduct an exit interview. During the exit interview, the departing 
employee should be specifically advised about the company’s trade secrets and confidential 
business information and the obligation not to disclose or use such information for her own 
benefit or the benefit of others without the express written consent of the company. The 
employee should be given a form to sign stating that during the exit interview the employee 
was once again informed that any proprietary information should not be disclosed and that 
the employee agrees not to disclose any such information without the consent of the 
company.  
 
 



:


prevent employe theft of proprietari inform
a compani can spend year develop a competit advantag over it competitor that
advantag can be elimin in an instant by employe walk out the door
when employe leav a compani there is usual littl if ani attent paid to where thei
go afterward howev if a compani begin to notic that a rival is suddenli take awai it
busi it should sit up and take notic often employe leav on compani for anoth
and take with them the knowledg of how that particular compani oper it price
polici it manufactur method it custom and so on when employe share what
thei have learn with a competitor the competit edg is lost
todai work forc is extrem mobil employe rare start with on compani and stai
until retir on top of that compani ar continu downsiz and lai off
employe in most case experienc employe have littl choic but to go to work for a
competitor or begin consult in their field cutback and fire do littl to foster an
attitud of loyalti among employe
employe awar
employe must be educ as to what inform is proprietari it is hard to protect
someth if no on know what need protect a secret formula mai be easi to identifi
but employe ar often not awar that subject thei mai be discuss over lunch in a
crowd restaur ar also trade secret that would prove invalu to a competitor it
doe not help that the court and legal scholar cannot decid on what constitut
proprietari inform definit of what is a trade secret depend on the organ and
the industri exampl of trade secret includ everyth from note in the margin of an
employe manual to a procedur for ty a fish lure in addit differ jurisdict
have differ law defin what can or cannot potenti be a trade secret
gener to establish a trade secret a compani ha to show that the inform is not
known in the industri that the compani ha made effort to keep it confidenti and that
the inform give the compani some sort of competit edg just becaus inform
is confidenti doe not make it a trade secret under the law howev even though
inform mai not be a trade secret as that term is defin under the statut it should
be protect by employe again the best test for decid what is confidenti inform is
to ask yourself if the inform would provid an advantag to the competit
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1887
nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement
a nondisclosur agreement is a written agreement that employe should sign as soon as
thei start work it usual provid that all proprietari confidenti or trade secret
inform the employe learn must be kept confidenti and must not be disclos to
anyon a noncompetit agreement is an agreement wherebi the employe agre not to
work for compet compani within a certain period of time after leav
gener motor corpor began requir it seniorlevel execut to sign these
agreement shortli after a wellpublic case against on of the compani former
purchas execut gm accus the execut of take million of dollar worth of
proprietari inform to hi new employ volkswagen gm accus him of push up
strategi meet befor he left so that he could gather even more data the employe
deni the charg gm conclud after thi happen that the us of noncompetit
agreement could help prevent a similar occurr
howev the us of nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement is not an overal
solut there ar sever legal problem with us these agreement as mention earlier
there is no clear definit of what constitut a trade secret in some instanc it can be
extrem difficult to determin what belong to the compani and what belong to the
employe
noncompetit agreement also have a varieti of problem first court in some
jurisdict have held that such agreement ar against public polici becaus thei limit
the futur employ of a person theref or in these jurisdict noncompetit
agreement ar unenforc other uphold the agreement but onli if thei ar part of an
otherwis valid employ agreement in these case the employ agreement and the
noncompetit agreement must be sign at the same time or the noncompetit
agreement is unenforc in addit if the employe is an at will employe who is not
cover by an employ agreement ani noncompetit sign by such an employe
would be unenforc
although nondisclosur and noncompetit agreement can be excel tool for
prevent the loss of confidenti inform to competitor their us is limit and legal
counsel familiar with employ law for the specif jurisdict should be consult
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1888 2011 fraud examin manual
howev mani profession sai that the real valu of such agreement is not their legal
power but their abil to creat the right imag thi includ make certain that
employe and outsid clearli understand that the compani is seriou about prevent the
loss of proprietari inform and will do everyth thei can to pursu those individu
who ar steal inform
make sure employe know when not to speak
often employe ar will to abid by nondisclosur agreement but thei do not
understand that the inform thei ar commun mai be confidenti for instanc a
softwar compani employe who work on product updat attend a trade associ
meet and entertain the other attende with war stori about the develop process
and what thing work and what didnt the employe wa later reprimand and seem
genuin unawar that the inform he had provid wa proprietari inform of
great valu to the compani competitor
exit interview
on of the most effect wai to protect a compani trade secret and confidenti
busi inform is to conduct an exit interview dure the exit interview the depart
employe should be specif advis about the compani trade secret and confidenti
busi inform and the oblig not to disclos or us such inform for her own
benefit or the benefit of other without the express written consent of the compani the
employe should be given a form to sign state that dure the exit interview the employe
wa onc again inform that ani proprietari inform should not be disclos and that
the employe agre not to disclos ani such inform without the consent of the
compani
