2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/What Is Ethics?


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


What Is Ethics? 
In A Critical Introduction to Ethics, Philip Wheelwright defined ethics as: 
 
that branch of philosophy which is the systematic study of reflective choice, of the standards 
of right and wrong by which it is to be guided, and of the goods toward which it may 
ultimately be directed. 
 
This definition contains three key elements: 
• Ethics involves questions requiring reflective choice (decision problems). 
• Ethics involves guides of right and wrong (moral principles). 
• Ethics is concerned with values (goods) inherent in ethical decisions.  
 
Why does an individual or a group need a code of ethical conduct? While it has been said 
that a person should be upright and not be kept  upright, a code of conduct serves a useful 
purpose as a reference and a benchmark. A code makes explicit some of the criteria for 
conduct particular to a profession. In this way, codes of professional ethics are able to 
provide some direct solutions that might not be available from general ethics theories.  
 
Furthermore, an individual is better able to know what the profession expects when a code 
of ethical conduct is in place. From the viewpoint of an organized profession, a code is a 
public declaration of principled conduct and a means of facilitating enforcement of 
Ethics for Fraud Examiners  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.902   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
standards of conduct. Practical enforcement and profession-wide internal discipline would 
be much more difficult if members were not first put on notice of the standards.  
 



:


what is ethic
in a critic introduct to ethic philip wheelwright defin ethic as
that branch of philosophi which is the systemat studi of reflect choic of the standard
of right and wrong by which it is to be guid and of the good toward which it mai
ultim be direct
thi definit contain three kei element
ethic involv question requir reflect choic decis problem
ethic involv guid of right and wrong moral principl
ethic is concern with valu good inher in ethic decis
why doe an individu or a group need a code of ethic conduct while it ha been said
that a person should be upright and not be kept upright a code of conduct serv a us
purpos as a refer and a benchmark a code make explicit some of the criteria for
conduct particular to a profess in thi wai code of profession ethic ar abl to
provid some direct solut that might not be avail from gener ethic theori
furthermor an individu is better abl to know what the profess expect when a code
of ethic conduct is in place from the viewpoint of an organ profess a code is a
public declar of principl conduct and a mean of facilit enforc of
ethic for fraud examin fraud prevent and deterr
4902 2011 fraud examin manual
standard of conduct practic enforc and professionwid intern disciplin would
be much more difficult if member were not first put on notic of the standard
