2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/Morality, Ethics, and Legality


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Morality, Ethics, and Legality 
Is it all right to lie to catch a crook? Consider the following story about a fraud examinati on.  
 
Abel, a fraud examiner, was hired by Megacorp, Inc. to discover the method stockroom 
employees were using to steal electronic parts from the inventory. Abel was given a cover 
identity known only to the president of Me gacorp. His application was processed through 
the personnel department in the normal manne r, and he was hired as a stockroom clerk. 
On the job, Abel preserved his false identity, infiltrated the gr oup responsible for the thefts, 
and produced sufficient evidence to have  three people arrested and indicted. 
 
While this story involves only one type of fraud (embezzlement) and one investigation 
method (undercover work), it can serve as a simple example of the moral, ethical, and legal 
issues facing fraud examiners. These issues involve principles of moral philosophy, rules of 
ethics, legal considerations, values, and above all, the problem of distinguishing right 
from wrong. One executive, upon taking office, to ld the board of directors that his would be 
an ethical administration, saying: “It is very simple. All it takes is knowing the difference 
between right and wrong.” But knowing that  difference is often the hardest part.  
 



:


moral ethic and legal
is it all right to lie to catch a crook consid the follow stori about a fraud examinati on
abel a fraud examin wa hire by megacorp inc to discov the method stockroom
employe were us to steal electron part from the inventori abel wa given a cover
ident known onli to the presid of me gacorp hi applic wa process through
the personnel depart in the normal mann r and he wa hire as a stockroom clerk
on the job abel preserv hi fals ident infiltr the gr oup respons for the theft
and produc suffici evid to have three peopl arrest and indict
while thi stori involv onli on type of fraud embezzl and on investig
method undercov work it can serv as a simpl exampl of the moral ethic and legal
issu face fraud examin these issu involv principl of moral philosophi rule of
ethic legal consider valu and abov all the problem of distinguish right
from wrong on execut upon take offic to ld the board of director that hi would be
an ethic administr sai it is veri simpl all it take is know the differ
between right and wrong but know that differ is often the hardest part
