2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ETHICS FOR FRAUD EXAMINERS/Morality, Ethics, and Legality/Philosophy, Ethics, and Law


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Philosophy, Ethics, and Law 
Moral philosophy exists at a global level, permeating all facets of the problems of 
distinguishing right from wrong. The field deals with human judgments based on standards 
that identify good  and evil. These words mean more than just right  and wrong, but they convey 
essentially the same idea. There are two aspects of moral philosophy that are important for 
fraud examiners to consider. The first is the human judgment process, which deals with ways 
of performing analyses of (i.e., thinking about) problems. The second is the standards or 
values — such as honesty, faithfulness, and unse lfishness—that people can use to make moral 
principles useful.  
 
Ethics can be distinguished from moral philosophy by its roots in society. People are usually 
more comfortable talking about ethics than moral philosophy because ethics seems practical 
while moral philosophy seems intellectual and impractical. Ethics generally refers to a 
specific setting — a society, culture, nation, profession, or small group. In this context, ethics 
refers to behavior that conforms to some societal norms or to a written code of ethics, such 
as the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics.  
 
When faced with an ethics-related problem, it is appropriate to begin the analysis of a 
possible action by asking: “Is it legal?” Such analys is is at the most practical level. Ethics is 
somewhat less global and is connected to the setting. The law deals very specifically with 
actions that are permitted and actions that are prohibited. With all due respect to the law, it 
is the lowest reference level for moral decisions. It happens, though not frequently, that a 
law might permit an action that is prohibited by a profession’s code of ethics. Going one 
step further, a profession’s code of ethics might permit actions that a moral philosopher 
would abhor. Likewise, laws and codes of eth ics might prohibit actions that present no 
problem in moral philosophy.  
 
For example, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants had rules of ethics that 
prohibited advertising, with the exception of broad-based institutional advertising. The 
profession believed that professional dignity and objectivity were enhanced by keeping 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.905 
practitioners out of this aspect of the commercial world. The U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, however, reached a different conclusion. 
They decided that the prohibitions against advertising were against the laws barring restraint 
of trade. The government forced the profession to eliminate the rules against advertising. 
This example illustrates the triumph of one set of values (the government’s belief that 
competition through advertising would benefit consumers) over another set (the professions’ 
belief that professional dignity should be preserved).  
 
All three areas—morality, ethics, and legality—are important for everyday decisions. It might 
not be enough to know that a contemplated action is legal or that it is permitted or 
prohibited by a group’s written code of ethics. And, while helpful, it might also not be 
enough to know that reasoning based on moral philosophy seems to identify that action as 
right or wrong. The important things to know are the distinctions between morality, ethics, 
and legality (i.e., between the philosophy, the rules, and the law). Only with this knowledge 
can a fraud examiner know where he stands when deciding upon and justifying a course  
of action.  
 
This material observes one important limitation. It confines its consideration of ethics for 
fraud examiners to matters of moral philosophy, rules of ethics, and general values. It does 
not deal with detailed matters of the law or with questions about the legality or illegality of 
actions a fraud examiner might take. This is not to say that the law is unimportant; it is just 
beyond the scope of this part of the materials.  
 



:


philosophi ethic and law
moral philosophi exist at a global level permeat all facet of the problem of
distinguish right from wrong the field deal with human judgment base on standard
that identifi good and evil these word mean more than just right and wrong but thei convei
essenti the same idea there ar two aspect of moral philosophi that ar import for
fraud examin to consid the first is the human judgment process which deal with wai
of perform analys of ie think about problem the second is the standard or
valu such as honesti faith and uns lfishnessthat peopl can us to make moral
principl us
ethic can be distinguish from moral philosophi by it root in societi peopl ar usual
more comfort talk about ethic than moral philosophi becaus ethic seem practic
while moral philosophi seem intellectu and impract ethic gener refer to a
specif set a societi cultur nation profess or small group in thi context ethic
refer to behavior that conform to some societ norm or to a written code of ethic such
as the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic
when face with an ethicsrel problem it is appropri to begin the analysi of a
possibl action by ask is it legal such anali is is at the most practic level ethic is
somewhat less global and is connect to the set the law deal veri specif with
action that ar permit and action that ar prohibit with all due respect to the law it
is the lowest refer level for moral decis it happen though not frequent that a
law might permit an action that is prohibit by a profess code of ethic go on
step further a profess code of ethic might permit action that a moral philosoph
would abhor likewis law and code of eth ic might prohibit action that present no
problem in moral philosophi
for exampl the american institut of certifi public account had rule of ethic that
prohibit advertis with the except of broadbas institut advertis the
profess believ that profession digniti and object were enhanc by keep
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4905
practition out of thi aspect of the commerci world the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic howev reach a differ conclus
thei decid that the prohibit against advertis were against the law bar restraint
of trade the govern forc the profess to elimin the rule against advertis
thi exampl illustr the triumph of on set of valu the govern belief that
competit through advertis would benefit consum over anoth set the profess
belief that profession digniti should be preserv
all three areasmor ethic and legalityar import for everydai decis it might
not be enough to know that a contempl action is legal or that it is permit or
prohibit by a group written code of ethic and while help it might also not be
enough to know that reason base on moral philosophi seem to identifi that action as
right or wrong the import thing to know ar the distinct between moral ethic
and legal ie between the philosophi the rule and the law onli with thi knowledg
can a fraud examin know where he stand when decid upon and justifi a cours
of action
thi materi observ on import limit it confin it consider of ethic for
fraud examin to matter of moral philosophi rule of ethic and gener valu it doe
not deal with detail matter of the law or with question about the legal or illeg of
action a fraud examin might take thi is not to sai that the law is unimport it is just
beyond the scope of thi part of the materi
