2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
 
I.  A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate a commitment to 
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
II.  A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not engage in any illegal or unethical 
conduct, or any activity which would constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
III. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, exhibit the highest level of 
integrity in the performance of all professional assignments, and will accept 
only assignments for which there is  reasonable expectation that the 
assignment will be completed with professional competence. 
 
IV.  A Certified Fraud Examiner will comply with lawful orders of the courts, and 
will testify to matters truthfully and without bias or prejudice. 
 
 V.  A Certified Fraud Examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence 
or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion 
rendered. No opinion shall be expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of 
any person or party. 
 
VI.  A Certified Fraud Examiner sha ll not reveal any confidential information 
obtained during a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
VII. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall reveal all material matters discovered during 
the course of an examination, which, if omitted, could cause a distortion of the 
facts. 
 
VIII. A Certified Fraud Examiner shall continually strive to increase the 
competence and effectiveness of professional services performed under his or 
her direction. 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1002   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics was created by the Board of 
Regents of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners and adopted January 1, 1989.  
 
 



:


acf code of profession ethic
i a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr a commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
ii a certifi fraud examin shall not engag in ani illeg or uneth
conduct or ani activ which would constitut a conflict of interest
iii a certifi fraud examin shall at all time exhibit the highest level of
integr in the perform of all profession assign and will accept
onli assign for which there is reason expect that the
assign will be complet with profession compet
iv a certifi fraud examin will compli with law order of the court and
will testifi to matter truthfulli and without bia or prejudic
v a certifi fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid
or other document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion
render no opinion shall be express regard the guilt or innoc of
ani person or parti
vi a certifi fraud examin sha ll not reveal ani confidenti inform
obtain dure a profession engag without proper author
vii a certifi fraud examin shall reveal all materi matter discov dure
the cours of an examin which if omit could caus a distort of the
fact
viii a certifi fraud examin shall continu strive to increas the
compet and effect of profession servic perform under hi or
her direct
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41002 2011 fraud examin manual
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic wa creat by the board of
regent of the associ of certifi fraud examin and adopt januari 1 1989
