2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence/Standards of Conduct


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Standards of Conduct 
One way to achieve the social recognition that goes with professionalism is to adhere to the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics. Other professions have such codes. 
They are the written versions of moral philosophy and values especially relevant to the 
group. Fraud examiners and other professionals must observe their codes with an awareness 
of the society around them. Care must be taken that rules are not created and followed in a 
self-serving manner, inimical to behavior expected by the public.  
 
Possessing and following a set of behavior rules is one thing, possessing and following a set 
that meets public expectations is another. Other professions (law, architecture, and 
accounting, to name three) have found themselves under attack from the U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice when their rules were perceived to have 
introduced unwarranted restraints of trade. While the Certified Fraud Examiner Code of 
Professional Ethics might not seem to contain such rules, they might come under attack in 
some future, different setting. Certified Fraud Examiners must be prepared to experience 
change, when appropriate change is necessary.  
 



:


standard of conduct
on wai to achiev the social recognit that goe with profession is to adher to the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic other profess have such code
thei ar the written version of moral philosophi and valu especi relev to the
group fraud examin and other profession must observ their code with an awar
of the societi around them care must be taken that rule ar not creat and follow in a
selfserv manner inim to behavior expect by the public
possess and follow a set of behavior rule is on thing possess and follow a set
that meet public expect is anoth other profess law architectur and
account to name three have found themselv under attack from the us feder trade
commiss and the us depart of justic when their rule were perceiv to have
introduc unwarr restraint of trade while the certifi fraud examin code of
profession ethic might not seem to contain such rule thei might come under attack in
some futur differ set certifi fraud examin must be prepar to experi
chang when appropri chang is necessari
