2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Reasonable Evidential Basis for Opinions/Guilt and Innocence


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Guilt and Innocence 
The rule that prohibits opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party is a 
rule of prudence. The AICPA had a rule that prohibited CPAs from attesting that a 
company’s financial forecast would be achieved. Most CPAs’ reaction to the rule was: “Why 
would anyone want to do something so dumb?” The general answer was that without the 
explicit rule, someone might give an achievability attestation, the actual events would fall 
short, and the CPA (and all other CPAs) would suffer criticism. The rule was a rule of 
prudence. Clearly, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to refrain from usurping the 
role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified Fraud Examiner for 
such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
In most situations, the fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such 
evidence might constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. 
But a clear line should be drawn between a report that essentially says, “Here is the evidence 
and the reasonable conclusions that can be drawn from it,” and one that steps over the line 
and says, “This person is guilty of the crime of fraud.” 
 
Whether or not a person is guilty (or innocent) of a crime is not a decision for the fraud 
examiner to make. The fraud examiner may draw reasonable conclusions based on the 
evidence. One of those conclusions may be that the suspected individual stole money, 
misrepresented a transaction, or concealed funds. There is no prohibition in the Code of 
Professional Ethics on expressing such a conclusion provided it has a reasonable basis in 
fact. The prohibition involves the next step, “The suspect took the money without 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1015 
permission and is therefore guilty of the crime of theft.” The individual may have taken the 
money without permission, but whether or not the individual is guilty of a crime is a 
determination for the judicial system, not the fraud examiner. 
 
 



:


guilt and innoc
the rule that prohibit opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti is a
rule of prudenc the aicpa had a rule that prohibit cpa from attest that a
compani financi forecast would be achiev most cpa reaction to the rule wa why
would anyon want to do someth so dumb the gener answer wa that without the
explicit rule someon might give an achiev attest the actual event would fall
short and the cpa and all other cpa would suffer critic the rule wa a rule of
prudenc clearli it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to refrain from usurp the
role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi fraud examin for
such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
in most situat the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such
evid might constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person
but a clear line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid
and the reason conclus that can be drawn from it and on that step over the line
and sai thi person is guilti of the crime of fraud
whether or not a person is guilti or innoc of a crime is not a decis for the fraud
examin to make the fraud examin mai draw reason conclus base on the
evid on of those conclus mai be that the suspect individu stole monei
misrepres a transact or conceal fund there is no prohibit in the code of
profession ethic on express such a conclus provid it ha a reason basi in
fact the prohibit involv the next step the suspect took the monei without
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41015
permiss and is therefor guilti of the crime of theft the individu mai have taken the
monei without permiss but whether or not the individu is guilti of a crime is a
determin for the judici system not the fraud examin
