2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Professional Improvement


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Professional Improvement 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall continually strive to increase the competence and 
effectiveness of professional services pe rformed under his or her direction. 
 
This rule contains both good advice and a specific directive for behavior. It is an admonition 
to progress toward greater expertise and thus better serve clients and employers.  
The state of the “fraud arts” changes continually. Years ago, investigators needed to learn 
how to cope with computer fraud. Today, Certified Fraud Examiners are faced with a 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1021 
growing array of ways and means for perpetrating frauds. While many of these might not be 
new, or might be variations on old themes, it is still a challenge for Certified Fraud 
Examiners to know about all of them. A continuing learning process is necessary for 
Certified Fraud Examiners to increase their competence and effectiveness in conducting 
fraud examinations.  
 
People who become Certified Fraud Examiners agree to complete 20 hours of continuing 
professional education each year. Course content is not specified in detail, but the 
requirement is that at least ten hours will be spent on technical subjects that contribute 
directly to fraud examination expertise. Certified Fraud Examiners who also are CPAs, CIAs, 
or who hold other professional designations can double-count continuing education hours 
obtained in connection with the other certifications, as long as they meet the criteria for 
fraud examination continuing education. Further details about policies and procedures are 
available from the Association.  
 
Professional ethics for Certified Fraud Examiners is not simply a matter covered by a few 
rules in a formal Code of Professional Ethics. Concepts of proper professional conduct 
permeate all areas of practice. Ethics are the foundation of Certified Fraud Examiners’ self-regulatory 
efforts.  
 
 The principled approach to thoughtful decisions is important in fraud examination work in 
all settings, such as private practice, industrial, government and foreign employment, and 
other working arrangements. The ethics rules might appear to be restrictive, but they are  
for the benefit of the public as well as for the discipline, use, and protection of Certified 
Fraud Examiners. 
 
 



:


profession improv
a certifi fraud examin shall continu strive to increas the compet and
effect of profession servic pe rform under hi or her direct
thi rule contain both good advic and a specif direct for behavior it is an admonit
to progress toward greater expertis and thu better serv client and employ
the state of the fraud art chang continu year ago investig need to learn
how to cope with comput fraud todai certifi fraud examin ar face with a
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41021
grow arrai of wai and mean for perpetr fraud while mani of these might not be
new or might be variat on old theme it is still a challeng for certifi fraud
examin to know about all of them a continu learn process is necessari for
certifi fraud examin to increas their compet and effect in conduct
fraud examin
peopl who becom certifi fraud examin agre to complet 20 hour of continu
profession educ each year cours content is not specifi in detail but the
requir is that at least ten hour will be spent on technic subject that contribut
directli to fraud examin expertis certifi fraud examin who also ar cpa cia
or who hold other profession design can doublecount continu educ hour
obtain in connect with the other certif as long as thei meet the criteria for
fraud examin continu educ further detail about polici and procedur ar
avail from the associ
profession ethic for certifi fraud examin is not simpli a matter cover by a few
rule in a formal code of profession ethic concept of proper profession conduct
permeat all area of practic ethic ar the foundat of certifi fraud examin selfregulatori
effort
the principl approach to thought decis is import in fraud examin work in
all set such as privat practic industri govern and foreign employ and
other work arrang the ethic rule might appear to be restrict but thei ar
for the benefit of the public as well as for the disciplin us and protect of certifi
fraud examin
