2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/CFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS/CFE Code of Professional Standards/III. Standards of Professional Conduct


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


III. Standards of Professional Conduct 
 
A. Integrity and Objectivity 
 
1. Members shall conduct themselves with integrity, knowing that public trust is 
founded on integrity. Members shall not sacrifice integrity to serve the client, their 
employer, or the public interest. 
 
2 Prior to accepting the fraud examination, members shall investigate for potential 
conflicts of interest. Members shall disclose any potential conflicts of interest to 
prospective clients who retain them or their employer. 
 
3. Members shall maintain objectivity in disc harging their professional responsibilities 
within the scope of the engagement. 
 
4. Members shall not commit discreditable acts, and shall always conduct themselves in 
the best interests of the reputation of the profession. 
 
5. Members shall not knowingly make a false statement when testifying in a court of 
law or other dispute resolution forum. Members shall comply with lawful orders of 
the courts or other dispute resolution bodies. Members shall not commit criminal 
acts or knowingly induce others to do so. 
 
B. Professional Competence 
 
1. Members shall be competent and shall not accept assignments where this 
competence is lacking. In some circumstances, it may be possible to meet the 
requirement for professional competence by use of consultation or referral. 
 
2. Members shall maintain the minimum program of continuing professional education 
required by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. A commitment to 
professionalism combining education and experience shall continue throughout the 
member’s professional career. Members shall continually strive to increase the 
competence and effectiveness of their professional services. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  CFE Code of Professional Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1103 
C. Due Professional Care 
 
1. Members shall exercise due professional care in the performance of their services. 
Due professional care requires diligence, critical analysis and professional skepticism 
in discharging professional responsibilities. 
 
2. Conclusions shall be supported with evidence that is relevant, competent,  
and sufficient. 
 
3. Members’ professional services shall be ad equately planned. Planning controls the 
performance of a fraud examination from inception through completion and 
involves developing strategies and objectives for performing the services. 
 
4. Work performed by assistants on a fraud examination shall be adequately supervised. 
The extent of supervision required varies depending on the complexities of the work 
and the qualifications of the assistants. 
 
D. Understanding with Client or Employer 
 
1. At the beginning of a fraud examination, members shall reach an understanding with 
those retaining them (client or employer) about the scope and limitations of the 
fraud examination and the responsibilities of all parties involved. 
 
2. Whenever the scope or limitations of a fraud examination or the responsibilities of 
the parties change significantly, a new understanding shall be reached with the client 
or employer. 
 
E. Communication with Client or Employer 
 
1. Members shall communicate to those who retained them (client or employer) 
significant findings made during the normal course of the fraud examination. 
 
F. Confidentiality 
 
1. Members shall not disclose confidential or privileged information obtained during 
the course of the fraud examination without the express permission of proper 
authority or order of a court. This requirement does not preclude professional 
CFE Code of Professional Standards Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
practice or investigative body reviews as long as the reviewing organization agrees to 
abide by the confidentiality restrictions. 
 



:


iii standard of profession conduct
a integr and object
1 member shall conduct themselv with integr know that public trust is
found on integr member shall not sacrific integr to serv the client their
employ or the public interest
2 prior to accept the fraud examin member shall investig for potenti
conflict of interest member shall disclos ani potenti conflict of interest to
prospect client who retain them or their employ
3 member shall maintain object in disc harg their profession respons
within the scope of the engag
4 member shall not commit discredit act and shall alwai conduct themselv in
the best interest of the reput of the profess
5 member shall not knowingli make a fals statement when testifi in a court of
law or other disput resolut forum member shall compli with law order of
the court or other disput resolut bodi member shall not commit crimin
act or knowingli induc other to do so
b profession compet
1 member shall be compet and shall not accept assign where thi
compet is lack in some circumst it mai be possibl to meet the
requir for profession compet by us of consult or referr
2 member shall maintain the minimum program of continu profession educ
requir by the associ of certifi fraud examin a commit to
profession combin educ and experi shall continu throughout the
member profession career member shall continu strive to increas the
compet and effect of their profession servic
fraud prevent and deterr cfe code of profession standard
2011 fraud examin manual 41103
c due profession care
1 member shall exercis due profession care in the perform of their servic
due profession care requir dilig critic analysi and profession skeptic
in discharg profession respons
2 conclus shall be support with evid that is relev compet
and suffici
3 member profession servic shall be ad equat plan plan control the
perform of a fraud examin from incept through complet and
involv develop strategi and object for perform the servic
4 work perform by assist on a fraud examin shall be adequ supervis
the extent of supervis requir vari depend on the complex of the work
and the qualif of the assist
d understand with client or employ
1 at the begin of a fraud examin member shall reach an understand with
those retain them client or employ about the scope and limit of the
fraud examin and the respons of all parti involv
2 whenev the scope or limit of a fraud examin or the respons of
the parti chang significantli a new understand shall be reach with the client
or employ
e commun with client or employ
1 member shall commun to those who retain them client or employ
signific find made dure the normal cours of the fraud examin
f confidenti
1 member shall not disclos confidenti or privileg inform obtain dure
the cours of the fraud examin without the express permiss of proper
author or order of a court thi requir doe not preclud profession
cfe code of profession standard fraud prevent and deterr
41104 2011 fraud examin manual
practic or investig bodi review as long as the review organ agre to
abid by the confidenti restrict
