2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD 
 
Over the last four decades, computer systems have improved dramatically. They are more 
powerful, smaller, cheaper, and more user-friendly. As they have advanced, computers have 
proliferated in our society, our businesses, and our personal lives. Most modern businesses 
and governments depend on their computer systems to support their operations, from 
personnel to financial management and everything in between.  
 
Initially, computers used to support business and government processes were backed up 
with hard copies. If the computer went down, the hard copies were used and everyone went 
back to manual forms and processes. However, in today’s environment, most businesses and 
government processes could not survive without the computer — there are few hard  
copy backups.  
 
Computers have become the mainstay of business and government processes. Without 
today’s computers, entire businesses and government operations would almost cease to 
function. Imagine trying to manually process tax returns, use robotics, compile budgets, 
build automobiles, build weapons systems, check law enforcement files, or get cash from 
automated teller machines (ATM) without the aid of computers.  
 
The proliferation of cheap, powerful, user-friendly computers has enabled more and more 
people to use them and more importantly, rely on them as part of their normal way of life. 
As businesses, government agencies, and individuals come to increasingly depend on 
computers as a necessary tool, so do the criminals. They use computers to support their 
illegal operations. Computer crimes and frauds are increasing and will no doubt continue to 
increase as more computers are networked internationally, thus giving global access to 
computer criminals. 
 
The following results were derived from the 2009 Computer Crime and Security Survey, 
conducted by the Computer Security Institute: 
• Respondents reported big jumps in incidence of password sniffing, financial fraud, and 
malware infection. 
• One-third of respondents’ organizations were fraudulently represented as the sender of a 
phishing message. 
• Average losses due to security incidents were down from $289,000 per respondent to 
$234,244 per respondent. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1802                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Twenty-five percent of respondents felt that over 60 percent of their financial losses 
were due to non-malicious actions by insiders. 
• Respondents were satisfied, though not overjoyed, with all security technologies. 
• Most respondents felt their investment in end-user security awareness training was 
inadequate, but most felt their investments in other components of their security 
program were adequate. 
• When asked what actions were taken following a security incident, 22 percent of 
respondents stated that they notified individuals whose personal information was 
breached and 17 percent stated that they provided new security services to users or 
customers. 
• When asked what security solutions ranked highest on their wishlists, many respondents 
named tools that would improve their visibility, such as better log management, security 
information and event management, security data visualization, and security dashboards. 
• Respondents generally said that regulatory compliance efforts have had a positive effect 
on their organization's security programs. 
  
The CSI figures also included data about the occurrence of threats to cyber-security in 2009 
compared to those in 2008: 
• 64.3 percent of respondents experienced malware infection, compared to 2008’s 50 
percent. 
• 29.2 percent experienced denial-of-service attacks, compared to 2008’s 21 percent. 
• 17.3 percent experienced password sniffing, compared to 9 percent in 2008. 
• 13.5 percent experienced Web site defacement, compared to 2008’s 6 percent. 
• 7.6 percent experienced instant messaging abuse, down from 21 percent in 2008.  
 
Unlike traditional fraud cases, computer fraud cases can be difficult for the fraud examiner 
because they: 
• Lack a traditional paper audit trail. 
• Require an understanding of the technology used to commit the crime. 
• Usually require an understanding of the technology of the victim computer. 
• Very often require the use of one or more specialists to assist the fraud examiner, even 
when the fraud examiner is computer literate. 
 
Before exploring the specifics of high tech crime however, let us clarify the computer’s 
function in the commission of these schemes. Computer crime is most often thought of as a 
crime that is committed with the aid of a computer. Yet the computer has various roles in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1803 
high tech crime, both as tool and target. According to Donn B. Parker, a cybercrime 
authority and author, the function of the computer in crime is fourfold. In Fighting  
Computer Crime, Mr. Parker describes how the computer serves as an object, a subject, a tool, 
and a symbol. 
• The computer as an object — Computers and network systems are themselves often objects or 
targets of crime, subject to physical sabotage, theft, or destruction of information. 
• The computer as a subject — According to Parker, computers are the direct subjects of crime 
“when they are the environment in which technologists commit crimes.” This category 
includes virus attacks.  
• The computer as a tool — Computers are used as the means to commit crime, whether 
embezzlement, theft of proprietary information, or hacking. 
• The computer as a symbol — Computers lend fraudsters an air of credibility and are often 
used to deceive victims into investment and pyramid schemes. 
 
In these four capacities, common computer crimes include: 
• Data alteration 
• Unauthorized access and entry to systems and information 
• Reading another’s e-mail without permission 
• Data destruction and sabotage 
• Internet consumer fraud 
• Sale of proprietary data 
• Desktop counterfeiting 
• Data extortion 
• Disclosure of confidential data 
• Identity theft 
• Electronic letter bombing 
• Software piracy 
• PBX fraud 
• Voicemail fraud 
• Cellular telephone fraud 
• Stolen long-distance calling cards 
 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1804                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


comput and internet fraud
over the last four decad comput system have improv dramat thei ar more
power smaller cheaper and more userfriendli as thei have advanc comput have
prolifer in our societi our busi and our person live most modern busi
and govern depend on their comput system to support their oper from
personnel to financi manag and everyth in between
initi comput us to support busi and govern process were back up
with hard copi if the comput went down the hard copi were us and everyon went
back to manual form and process howev in todai environ most busi and
govern process could not surviv without the comput there ar few hard
copi backup
comput have becom the mainstai of busi and govern process without
todai comput entir busi and govern oper would almost ceas to
function imagin try to manual process tax return us robot compil budget
build automobil build weapon system check law enforc file or get cash from
autom teller machin atm without the aid of comput
the prolifer of cheap power userfriendli comput ha enabl more and more
peopl to us them and more importantli reli on them as part of their normal wai of life
as busi govern agenc and individu come to increasingli depend on
comput as a necessari tool so do the crimin thei us comput to support their
illeg oper comput crime and fraud ar increas and will no doubt continu to
increas as more comput ar network internation thu give global access to
comput crimin
the follow result were deriv from the 2009 comput crime and secur survei
conduct by the comput secur institut
respond report big jump in incid of password snif financi fraud and
malwar infect
onethird of respond organ were fraudul repres as the sender of a
phish messag
averag loss due to secur incid were down from 289000 per respond to
234244 per respond
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11802 2011 fraud examin manual
twentyf percent of respond felt that over 60 percent of their financi loss
were due to nonmalici action by insid
respond were satisfi though not overjoi with all secur technolog
most respond felt their invest in endus secur awar train wa
inadequ but most felt their invest in other compon of their secur
program were adequ
when ask what action were taken follow a secur incid 22 percent of
respond state that thei notifi individu whose person inform wa
breach and 17 percent state that thei provid new secur servic to user or
custom
when ask what secur solut rank highest on their wishlist mani respond
name tool that would improv their visibl such as better log manag secur
inform and event manag secur data visual and secur dashboard
respond gener said that regulatori complianc effort have had a posit effect
on their organ secur program
the csi figur also includ data about the occurr of threat to cybersecur in 2009
compar to those in 2008
643 percent of respond experienc malwar infect compar to 2008 50
percent
292 percent experienc denialofservic attack compar to 2008 21 percent
173 percent experienc password snif compar to 9 percent in 2008
135 percent experienc web site defac compar to 2008 6 percent
76 percent experienc instant messag abus down from 21 percent in 2008
unlik tradit fraud case comput fraud case can be difficult for the fraud examin
becaus thei
lack a tradit paper audit trail
requir an understand of the technolog us to commit the crime
usual requir an understand of the technolog of the victim comput
veri often requir the us of on or more specialist to assist the fraud examin even
when the fraud examin is comput liter
befor explor the specif of high tech crime howev let us clarifi the comput
function in the commiss of these scheme comput crime is most often thought of as a
crime that is commit with the aid of a comput yet the comput ha variou role in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11803
high tech crime both as tool and target accord to donn b parker a cybercrim
author and author the function of the comput in crime is fourfold in fight
comput crime mr parker describ how the comput serv as an object a subject a tool
and a symbol
the comput as an object comput and network system ar themselv often object or
target of crime subject to physic sabotag theft or destruct of inform
the comput as a subject accord to parker comput ar the direct subject of crime
when thei ar the environ in which technologist commit crime thi categori
includ viru attack
the comput as a tool comput ar us as the mean to commit crime whether
embezzl theft of proprietari inform or hack
the comput as a symbol comput lend fraudster an air of credibl and ar often
us to deceiv victim into invest and pyramid scheme
in these four capac common comput crime includ
data alter
unauthor access and entri to system and inform
read anoth email without permiss
data destruct and sabotag
internet consum fraud
sale of proprietari data
desktop counterfeit
data extort
disclosur of confidenti data
ident theft
electron letter bomb
softwar piraci
pbx fraud
voicemail fraud
cellular telephon fraud
stolen longdist call card
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11804 2011 fraud examin manual
