2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Hacking/Social Engineering


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Social Engineering 
Another means of gaining access to a system involves simple deception. The hacker uses his 
verbal skills to deceive victims into disclosing information they ought not to divulge, or 
convinces victims to commit acts that facilitate the hacker’s scheme. Often posing as an 
employee or someone hired by the organization, the hacker easily deceives real employees 
into revealing information. In order to research his scheme, he may avail himself of 
documents in the company dumpster, such as internal telephone directories and 
correspondence. 
 
The hacker may assume a number of different guises to accomplish this deception. He may 
pose as a new or temporary worker and ask information systems employees for a password 
so that he can begin work. He may also pose as someone in a position of authority and 
intimidate employees into revealing confidential information.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1807 
Sometimes overt deception is not required. In large corporations, hackers can take advantage 
of the anonymity among employees. By donning office attire, they can blend into the crowd 
and thus peruse the premises, perhaps gaining a password written down at an employee’s 
desk in the process. 
 



:


social engin
anoth mean of gain access to a system involv simpl decept the hacker us hi
verbal skill to deceiv victim into disclos inform thei ought not to divulg or
convinc victim to commit act that facilit the hacker scheme often pose as an
employe or someon hire by the organ the hacker easili deceiv real employe
into reveal inform in order to research hi scheme he mai avail himself of
document in the compani dumpster such as intern telephon directori and
correspond
the hacker mai assum a number of differ guis to accomplish thi decept he mai
pose as a new or temporari worker and ask inform system employe for a password
so that he can begin work he mai also pose as someon in a posit of author and
intimid employe into reveal confidenti inform
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11807
sometim overt decept is not requir in larg corpor hacker can take advantag
of the anonym among employe by don offic attir thei can blend into the crowd
and thu perus the premis perhap gain a password written down at an employe
desk in the process
