2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses/Multi-Partite Viruses


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Multi-Partite Viruses  
Multi-partite viruses share some of the characteristics of boot sector viruses and file viruses, 
which increases its ability to spread. They can infect .com and .exe files, and the boot sector 
of the computer’s hard drive. 
 
On a computer booted up with an infected diskette, a typical multi-partite virus will first 
reside in memory and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive. From there the virus can 
infect a PC’s entire environment. This type of virus accounts for a large number of 
infections. 
 
The Tequila virus is a type of multi-partite virus. Tequila is a memory resident master boot 
sector (partition table) and .exe file infector. It uses a complex encryption method and 
garbling to avoid detection. When a program infected with Tequila is executed, the virus will 
modify the hard disk master boot sector, if it is not already infected. The virus also copies 
itself to the last six sectors of the system hard disk. When the workstation is later rebooted 
from the system hard disk, Tequila will become memory resident. Once Tequila is memory 
resident, it infects .exe files when they are executed.  
 
The CHKDSK command will indicate the system has 3,072 fewer bytes of memory than 
what is installed. Infected .exe programs increase in size by 2,468 bytes, though the file 
length increase cannot be seen in the disk directory listing because the virus hides it.  
Tequila activates four months after the initial date of infection. At this time, and every 
month thereafter, the virus will display a graphic and the following message: “Execute: mov 
ax, FE03 / int 21. Key to go on.”  
 



:


multipartit virus
multipartit virus share some of the characterist of boot sector virus and file virus
which increas it abil to spread thei can infect com and ex file and the boot sector
of the comput hard drive
on a comput boot up with an infect diskett a typic multipartit viru will first
resid in memori and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive from there the viru can
infect a pc entir environ thi type of viru account for a larg number of
infect
the tequila viru is a type of multipartit viru tequila is a memori resid master boot
sector partit tabl and ex file infector it us a complex encrypt method and
garbl to avoid detect when a program infect with tequila is execut the viru will
modifi the hard disk master boot sector if it is not alreadi infect the viru also copi
itself to the last six sector of the system hard disk when the workstat is later reboot
from the system hard disk tequila will becom memori resid onc tequila is memori
resid it infect ex file when thei ar execut
the chkdsk command will indic the system ha 3072 fewer byte of memori than
what is instal infect ex program increas in size by 2468 byte though the file
length increas cannot be seen in the disk directori list becaus the viru hide it
tequila activ four month after the initi date of infect at thi time and everi
month thereaft the viru will displai a graphic and the follow messag execut mov
ax fe03 int 21 kei to go on
