2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses/Virus Indicators


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Virus Indicators 
The following are some of the indicators that a computer might exhibit suggesting that it 
might be infected: 
• A sudden and sometimes dramatic decrease of free space on your media. 
• The system suddenly, and for no apparent reason, slows down its command-response 
time. 
• An increase in the size of some files. 
• There has been a change in the length of executable files, a change in their content, or a 
change in their file date/time stamp. 
• An unexpected number of disk accesses, especially to particular file(s). 
• The operating system and/or other programs suddenly begin behaving in unpredictable 
ways. Sometimes disk files that should be there cannot be accessed or are suddenly 
erased with no warning. 
• Unusual messages and graphics. 
• Unable to boot-up the system. 
• Unable to access files. 
• Unexplained and repeated maintenance repairs. 
• System or data files disappear or become fragmented. 
• Unexplained changes in memory. 
• Unexplained changes in program sizes. 
• Resident antiviral software programs display messages that a virus has been encountered. 
Note that until the source of the virus has been identified and removed from the system, 
antiviral systems might continually inform the operator that a virus is being encountered 
and removed. 
 



:


viru indic
the follow ar some of the indic that a comput might exhibit suggest that it
might be infect
a sudden and sometim dramat decreas of free space on your media
the system suddenli and for no appar reason slow down it commandrespons
time
an increas in the size of some file
there ha been a chang in the length of execut file a chang in their content or a
chang in their file datetim stamp
an unexpect number of disk access especi to particular file
the oper system andor other program suddenli begin behav in unpredict
wai sometim disk file that should be there cannot be access or ar suddenli
eras with no warn
unusu messag and graphic
unabl to bootup the system
unabl to access file
unexplain and repeat mainten repair
system or data file disappear or becom fragment
unexplain chang in memori
unexplain chang in program size
resid antivir softwar program displai messag that a viru ha been encount
note that until the sourc of the viru ha been identifi and remov from the system
antivir system might continu inform the oper that a viru is be encount
and remov
