2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Internet Fraud/Foreign Trusts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Foreign Trusts 
Information on this scheme is easily found on the Internet. The set-up caters to the desire to 
avoid taxes. For a fee, the company purports to be able to create a foreign trust to which 
taxpayers can transfer their assets. Since the trust is not within the taxpayer’s country, the 
logic goes, the assets are not subject to taxation. 
 
The logic is faulty for several reasons. First, if the taxpayer derives use from the funds in the 
trust, according to law those funds are considered taxable income. Thus, consumers who fall 
for this scam subject themselves to prosecution for tax evasion. 
 
That is, of course, only if the trust is set up at all. Some of the operators of this scheme 
simply take consumers’ money and disappear. And, sadly, those are the consumers who get 
off lightly. Others who have fallen for this pitch find that they have transferred all of their 
assets to a trust of which they are not the beneficiaries. Their assets then legally belong to 
another entity and getting them transferred back to their control is virtually impossible. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1828                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


foreign trust
inform on thi scheme is easili found on the internet the setup cater to the desir to
avoid tax for a fee the compani purport to be abl to creat a foreign trust to which
taxpay can transfer their asset sinc the trust is not within the taxpay countri the
logic goe the asset ar not subject to taxat
the logic is faulti for sever reason first if the taxpay deriv us from the fund in the
trust accord to law those fund ar consid taxabl incom thu consum who fall
for thi scam subject themselv to prosecut for tax evas
that is of cours onli if the trust is set up at all some of the oper of thi scheme
simpli take consum monei and disappear and sadli those ar the consum who get
off lightli other who have fallen for thi pitch find that thei have transfer all of their
asset to a trust of which thei ar not the beneficiari their asset then legal belong to
anoth entiti and get them transfer back to their control is virtual imposs
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11828 2011 fraud examin manual
