2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Electronic Commerce


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Electronic Commerce  
Electronic commerce, or e-commerce, is becoming a major form of retailing, marketing, 
advertising, and inter-personal communications. The hardware infrastructure required for 
high-speed data, voice, and video transmission to and from private homes is being 
introduced to residential streets everywhere.  
 
We have all heard people talk about their fears about putting their credit card numbers, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), street addresses, phone numbers, and other personal 
information out on the Internet. In reality, there is very little difference between securing 
electronic commerce and securing any other kind of information system resource. 
 
In addition to these traditional goals of information systems security, confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability, there are a few that are more directly related to networked 
transactions, which is exactly what e-commerce consists of: 
• Authentication. This requirement addresses the problem of identifying the parties of an 
e-commerce transaction to each other. We want to make sure that we can determine 
with whom we (or our computers) are communicating. 
• Non-repudiation. Non-repudiation can help ensure that no party to an e-commerce 
transaction can later deny that the transaction occurred. We need some way to be able to 
recognize a “signature” between e-commerce parties just as we rely on written signatures 
on paper documents. 
 
While recent years have seen an increase in the number of consumers and businesses willing 
to conduct transactions, online there still exists some hesitancy to fully embrace e-commerce 
technology. It is cases like the one described below that cause consumers to lose confidence 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1835 
in e-commerce. In the following example, a hacker crafted a sophisticated scam that hurt 
millions of consumers. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Albert Gonzales had already been caught hacking into the Indian government’s website 
and trafficking a million credit/debt card numbers before he was caught stealing many 
more credit/debit card numbers from TJX Companies, the company that operates retails 
stores such as TJ Maxx and Marshall’s. After two years worth of sensitive data and 45.6 
million credit card and debit card numbers were compromised, TJX Companies notified the 
authorities of their data leakage.  
Starting in 2005, Albert found non-secure wireless networks on TJX Companies' systems 
and worked with others to identify vulnerable servers to attack, infiltrate, and later use to 
jumpbox into other more secure servers. From there, he and his conspirators were able to 
install malware used to steal data and sniffing software onto the networks of TJX and all 
the stores operating under them, even outside of the United States. TJX discovered the 
breach in December of 2006 and was under the belief that they had only been losing data 
for six to seven months. After further investigation, however, they found that they had been 
losing sensitive data since 2005. But by the time TJX had even started discovering the 
extent of their security breach, Albert had already moved on to bigger and better operations. 
In 2008, Albert was arrested on charges related to hacking into other companies’ 
networks, and he now faces 15–25 years in prison. 
  
ISP messages are also used to sneak Trojan horse programs onto a user’s computer. The 
user is tempted with free pornographic pictures, or software that will boost their computer’s 
performance. When the attached file is opened, it triggers a program that surreptitiously 
collects the subscriber’s account name and password, which are then relayed to the hacker 
who sent the message. 
 
Many experts say that it is currently possible to have secure transactions over the Internet 
because the latest encryption technologies and security protocols allow for this. However, 
fully realized standards are not yet in place for all business-to-business or business-to-customer 
transactions. Some current security protocols do not permit non-repudiation of 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1836                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
data, which is required if firms seriously want to conduct business over the Internet. 
However, the arrival of standards for using smart card technology will transform Internet 
business and commerce as a whole. Smart card technology offers a solution to the major 
secure transactions requirements, namely data integrity, user authentication, and non-
 repudiation of data. Smart card technology also involves the application of third-party trust 
relationships to the Internet. 
 



:


electron commerc
electron commerc or ecommerc is becom a major form of retail market
advertis and interperson commun the hardwar infrastructur requir for
highspe data voic and video transmiss to and from privat home is be
introduc to residenti street everywher
we have all heard peopl talk about their fear about put their credit card number
person identif number pin street address phone number and other person
inform out on the internet in realiti there is veri littl differ between secur
electron commerc and secur ani other kind of inform system resourc
in addit to these tradit goal of inform system secur confidenti
integr and avail there ar a few that ar more directli relat to network
transact which is exactli what ecommerc consist of
authent thi requir address the problem of identifi the parti of an
ecommerc transact to each other we want to make sure that we can determin
with whom we or our comput ar commun
nonrepudi nonrepudi can help ensur that no parti to an ecommerc
transact can later deni that the transact occur we need some wai to be abl to
recogn a signatur between ecommerc parti just as we reli on written signatur
on paper document
while recent year have seen an increas in the number of consum and busi will
to conduct transact onlin there still exist some hesit to fulli embrac ecommerc
technolog it is case like the on describ below that caus consum to lose confid
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11835
in ecommerc in the follow exampl a hacker craft a sophist scam that hurt
million of consum
exampl
albert gonzal had alreadi been caught hack into the indian govern websit
and traffick a million creditdebt card number befor he wa caught steal mani
more creditdebit card number from tjx compani the compani that oper retail
store such as tj maxx and marshal after two year worth of sensit data and 456
million credit card and debit card number were compromis tjx compani notifi the
author of their data leakag
start in 2005 albert found nonsecur wireless network on tjx compani system
and work with other to identifi vulner server to attack infiltr and later us to
jumpbox into other more secur server from there he and hi conspir were abl to
instal malwar us to steal data and snif softwar onto the network of tjx and all
the store oper under them even outsid of the unit state tjx discov the
breach in decemb of 2006 and wa under the belief that thei had onli been lose data
for six to seven month after further investig howev thei found that thei had been
lose sensit data sinc 2005 but by the time tjx had even start discov the
extent of their secur breach albert had alreadi move on to bigger and better oper
in 2008 albert wa arrest on charg relat to hack into other compani
network and he now face 1525 year in prison
isp messag ar also us to sneak trojan hors program onto a user comput the
user is tempt with free pornograph pictur or softwar that will boost their comput
perform when the attach file is open it trigger a program that surreptiti
collect the subscrib account name and password which ar then relai to the hacker
who sent the messag
mani expert sai that it is current possibl to have secur transact over the internet
becaus the latest encrypt technolog and secur protocol allow for thi howev
fulli realiz standard ar not yet in place for all businesstobusi or businesstocustom
transact some current secur protocol do not permit nonrepudi of
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11836 2011 fraud examin manual
data which is requir if firm serious want to conduct busi over the internet
howev the arriv of standard for us smart card technolog will transform internet
busi and commerc as a whole smart card technolog offer a solut to the major
secur transact requir name data integr user authent and non
repudi of data smart card technolog also involv the applic of thirdparti trust
relationship to the internet
