2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes 
Once an organization has received an indication that a possible criminal violation has 
occurred by means of its information system resources, a preliminary investigation into the 
allegation should be conducted to achieve the following goals: 
 
1. Determine if indeed a crime has been committed. This is the critical step in the 
internal investigation. The organization must be careful to differentiate between 
inadvertent computer misuse and deliberate criminal intent. The company’s internal 
auditors, physical and information security specialists, and senior management 
should be involved in making this type of decision. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1849 
2. Determine the status of the crime. When did the incident begin? Where did the 
intrusion come from? Internal or external? Is the incident still occurring? If not still 
occurring, when did it stop? 
 
3. Review the organization security and audit policies and procedures to determine the 
best method for continuing the investigation. 
 
4. Determine the need for law enforcement assistance. The organization will have to 
decide if the violation is serious enough to call in the police or other law 
enforcement entities. Most computer crimes are not reported to law enforcement 
due to several factors, including the organization’s desire to keep its flaws and 
weaknesses from being exposed to its customers and stockholders. This is a difficult 
decision for the company to make. However, as we also mentioned earlier, if 
companies don’t report computer crimes, then law enforcement will be powerless to 
help prevent and solve them and computer criminals will feel they have a free hand 
to continue their activities. 
 



:


conduct an investig regard comput crime
onc an organ ha receiv an indic that a possibl crimin violat ha
occur by mean of it inform system resourc a preliminari investig into the
alleg should be conduct to achiev the follow goal
1 determin if inde a crime ha been commit thi is the critic step in the
intern investig the organ must be care to differenti between
inadvert comput misus and deliber crimin intent the compani intern
auditor physic and inform secur specialist and senior manag
should be involv in make thi type of decis
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11849
2 determin the statu of the crime when did the incid begin where did the
intrus come from intern or extern is the incid still occur if not still
occur when did it stop
3 review the organ secur and audit polici and procedur to determin the
best method for continu the investig
4 determin the need for law enforc assist the organ will have to
decid if the violat is seriou enough to call in the polic or other law
enforc entiti most comput crime ar not report to law enforc
due to sever factor includ the organ desir to keep it flaw and
weak from be expos to it custom and stockhold thi is a difficult
decis for the compani to make howev as we also mention earlier if
compani dont report comput crime then law enforc will be powerless to
help prevent and solv them and comput crimin will feel thei have a free hand
to continu their activ
