2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes/Pre-Search Preparation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Pre-Search Preparation 
Obtaining as much intelligence as possible regard ing the location of the potential evidence is 
very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Questions that fraud examiners 
should consider might include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search. In one case, 
approximately 17 networked file servers were involved, with multiple routers and dial-up 
modems. A team of only two investigators would need at least four to six hours to 
complete a seizure of this magnitude.  
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant. The time to discover that an “expert 
witness” has a criminal conviction is before the search warrant affidavit has even been 
written, not when the witness takes the stand to testify in a criminal proceeding. 
• Determine the resources that will be required to successfully conduct the search. If a 
great deal of equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported 
from the location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search. In another case, an assistant district attorney 
requested assistance in the execution of a search warrant. When detectives arrived, they 
discovered that the DA wanted them to seize more than 30 computers, including 3 file 
servers. This was at 3 p.m., and the DA then told the detectives that the authority to 
execute the search warrant expired at 5 p.m. Naturally, the detectives could not possibly 
have conducted the seizure within that time frame and in this case, the evidence was lost. 
A better strategy would have been to time the execution of the search warrant for 5 p.m.  
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1852                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
on a Friday afternoon. This would give the entire weekend to conduct the search, if 
necessary. 
 



:


presearch prepar
obtain as much intellig as possibl regard ing the locat of the potenti evid is
veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit question that fraud examin
should consid might includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search in on case
approxim 17 network file server were involv with multipl router and dialup
modem a team of onli two investig would need at least four to six hour to
complet a seizur of thi magnitud
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant the time to discov that an expert
wit ha a crimin convict is befor the search warrant affidavit ha even been
written not when the wit take the stand to testifi in a crimin proceed
determin the resourc that will be requir to successfulli conduct the search if a
great deal of equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport
from the locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search in anoth case an assist district attornei
request assist in the execut of a search warrant when detect arriv thei
discov that the da want them to seiz more than 30 comput includ 3 file
server thi wa at 3 pm and the da then told the detect that the author to
execut the search warrant expir at 5 pm natur the detect could not possibl
have conduct the seizur within that time frame and in thi case the evid wa lost
a better strategi would have been to time the execut of the search warrant for 5 pm
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11852 2011 fraud examin manual
on a fridai afternoon thi would give the entir weekend to conduct the search if
necessari
