2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Crime Laws/Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986/THE WIRETAP ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTIONS 2510-2521)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


THE WIRETAP ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTIONS 2510-2521) 
In response to privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, which prohibits anyone 
from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, oral, or electronic 
communication. 
  
Focusing on its applicability to computer fraud, the Wiretap Act prohibits the intentional 
interception of certain electronic communications, including e-mail; it does not govern 
stored communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of 
the contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts 
have held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Additionally, most courts agree that interception does not occur when an individual obtains 
access to an electronically stored copy of the communication, “whether such storage occurs 
pre- or post-delivery, and even if the storage lasts only a few milliseconds.” As a result, the 
Wiretap Act is often inadequate to protect electronic communications sent over the Internet.  
 
The Wiretap Act also contains several exceptions to prosecution, including the consent 
exception, which provides that parties to the communication may authorize others to 
intercept the transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees.  
  



:


the wiretap act titl 18 us code section 25102521
in respons to privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act which prohibit anyon
from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire oral or electron
commun
focus on it applic to comput fraud the wiretap act prohibit the intent
intercept of certain electron commun includ email it doe not govern
store commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of
the content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court
have held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
addition most court agre that intercept doe not occur when an individu obtain
access to an electron store copi of the commun whether such storag occur
pre or postdeliveri and even if the storag last onli a few millisecond as a result the
wiretap act is often inadequ to protect electron commun sent over the internet
the wiretap act also contain sever except to prosecut includ the consent
except which provid that parti to the commun mai author other to
intercept the transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
