2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Crime Laws/Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986/STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 2701)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 2701) 
As part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Congress enacted the Stored 
Communications Act (SCA) to protect stored electronic communications, such as e-mail, 
and voicemail by prohibiting the unauthorized access of such communications that are in 
storage. More specifically, the SCA prohibits unlawful access to a facility, which provides an 
electronic communication service, and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1868                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
access to a wire or electronic communication while it is electronically stored in such  
a system.  
 
Unlike interception under the Wiretap Act, an electronic communication falls under the SCA 
once a system receives and stores it. However, like the Wiretap Act, the SCA includes a 
consent exception. Under this exception, a service provider may disclose electronic 
communications with the lawful consent of the originator, an addressee, or the intended 
recipient.  
 
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment for 
up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for not more than 10 years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, courts may impose a 
fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all subsequent convictions, 
courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to 10 years. 
 



:


store commun act titl 18 us code section 2701
as part of the electron commun privaci act congress enact the store
commun act sca to protect store electron commun such as email
and voicemail by prohibit the unauthor access of such commun that ar in
storag more specif the sca prohibit unlaw access to a facil which provid an
electron commun servic and then obtain alter or prevent author
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11868 2011 fraud examin manual
access to a wire or electron commun while it is electron store in such
a system
unlik intercept under the wiretap act an electron commun fall under the sca
onc a system receiv and store it howev like the wiretap act the sca includ a
consent except under thi except a servic provid mai disclos electron
commun with the law consent of the origin an addresse or the intend
recipi
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison for
up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor imprison
for not more than 10 year in ani other case where it is a first offens court mai impos a
fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all subsequ convict
court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to 10 year
