2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Negotiated Checks


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Negotiated Checks 
Canceled checks written by a subject or received from others provide the fraud examiner 
with much more than amounts, payees, and endorsees. Of particular interest are checks that 
have been cashed. All banks use a series of codes or symbols imprinted on the front of a 
check to show that the check has been cashed. The specific codes used in various areas can 
be obtained locally. 
 
A useful technique to help examine negotiated checks is to list the information from the 
checks on a spreadsheet (either manual or electronic). Checks should be listed by number 
and date on the left with the payee, amount, and purpose of the check, if known, to the 
right. This will show the subject’s routine monthly or annual expenditures that can be useful 
for computing the comparative net worth. The absence of a check for a recurring payment 
for a particular month might indicate a cash payment, which in turn would indicate possible 
undisclosed cash income. Examine the backs of checks payable to cash and note where they 
were cashed. The depository stamp can identify the bank at which the check was cashed. 
This information may provide a lead to another bank account. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.812   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


negoti check
cancel check written by a subject or receiv from other provid the fraud examin
with much more than amount paye and endorse of particular interest ar check that
have been cash all bank us a seri of code or symbol imprint on the front of a
check to show that the check ha been cash the specif code us in variou area can
be obtain local
a us techniqu to help examin negoti check is to list the inform from the
check on a spreadsheet either manual or electron check should be list by number
and date on the left with the paye amount and purpos of the check if known to the
right thi will show the subject routin monthli or annual expenditur that can be us
for comput the compar net worth the absenc of a check for a recur payment
for a particular month might indic a cash payment which in turn would indic possibl
undisclos cash incom examin the back of check payabl to cash and note where thei
were cash the depositori stamp can identifi the bank at which the check wa cash
thi inform mai provid a lead to anoth bank account
trace illicit transact investig
3812 2011 fraud examin manual
