2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Negotiated Checks/MAGNETIC INK CHARACTER RECOGNITION


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


MAGNETIC INK CHARACTER RECOGNITION 
Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) is a machine language and is a check design 
standard to which all banks must conform. Numeric information is printed in magnetic ink 
on the bottom of bank checks and other documents. This coding is electronically scanned by 
computers that convert the magnetic ink notations into electronic impulses readable by a 
computer. MICR information is printed in groupings called fields. The first field on the left 
on bank checks is the Federal Reserve check routing code and the next is the ABA transit 
number. These numbers also appear in the upper right corner of the check. 
 
The account number field shows the drawer’s assigned account number at the bank. When 
the check is processed through the bank, an additional field is added on the right for the 
amount of the check. The dollar amount of the check should always equal the encoded 
MICR amount. These two figures should be compared to make sure that the subject did not 
alter the returned check. All checks, drafts, and similar items that are not encoded with 
magnetic ink cannot be cleared through the Federal Reserve system without special handling. 
 



:


magnet ink charact recognit
magnet ink charact recognit micr is a machin languag and is a check design
standard to which all bank must conform numer inform is print in magnet ink
on the bottom of bank check and other document thi code is electron scan by
comput that convert the magnet ink notat into electron impuls readabl by a
comput micr inform is print in group call field the first field on the left
on bank check is the feder reserv check rout code and the next is the aba transit
number these number also appear in the upper right corner of the check
the account number field show the drawer assign account number at the bank when
the check is process through the bank an addit field is ad on the right for the
amount of the check the dollar amount of the check should alwai equal the encod
micr amount these two figur should be compar to make sure that the subject did not
alter the return check all check draft and similar item that ar not encod with
magnet ink cannot be clear through the feder reserv system without special handl
