2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Locating Hidden Assets/Office of International Affairs/LETTERS ROGATORY


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


LETTERS ROGATORY 
Letters Rogatory are formal requests by the courts of one country to the courts of another 
country.  
 
The information needed for a Letter Rogatory request is as follows: 
• The facts of the case showing at least a reasonable suspicion that the offense under 
investigation might have been committed 
• The names and identifying information of people or entities involved in the matter 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The names and identifying information of witnesses or entities whose names might be 
on bank records (if accounts are held in other names) 
• The names, addresses, and other information concerning banks, businesses, or bank 
account numbers 
• The offenses being investigated or prosecuted in the United States, to include penalties 
• The assistance requested of the foreign country, whether it is documents, testimony, 
freezing of assets, etc. (If you want a foreign magistrate to question a witness, write out 
the questions that you want the witness to be asked, even if you ask to be present during 
the questioning.) 
• The procedures to be followed (how to authenticate business documents and records for 
use in U.S. courts) 
 
The procedure for making formal requests by a Letter Rogatory is as follows: 
• Call the OIA team handling the relevant part of the world concerning the search for 
guidance and assistance. 
• Draft a Letter Rogatory following an exemplar  or other materials provided by the OIA. 
• Have the OIA representative review and approve the draft. 
• The prosecutor will then file a motion in federal court for issuance of a Letter Rogatory, 
together with a memorandum in support and proposed order (submit two copies, one 
for the clerk and one for the foreign court, to be signed by the judge). 
• The judge signs both Letters Rogatory. 
• File one signed Letter Rogatory with the court clerk. 
• Have the court clerk authenticate the second signed Letter Rogatory either via apostille 
or exemplification certificate. 
• Have the Letter Rogatory translated into the proper language. 
• Send the signed Letter Rogatory and translation to the OIA for transmission through 
diplomatic channels to the proper foreign government. 
• The Minister of Justice in the foreign country normally presents the Letter Rogatory to 
the appropriate court. 
• The foreign court determines whether to execute the Letter Rogatory. If the 
determination is favorable, the court then obtains the documents, testimony, and other 
information. 
• Evidence resulting from the execution of the Letter Rogatory is returned through 
diplomatic channels to the OIA. 
• The OIA will then forward the information to the prosecutor. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.853 
Letters Rogatory should be written in simple, non-technical English and should not include 
unnecessary information that may confuse courts in the receiving foreign state. Avoid use of 
the term discovery .” Similarly, to avoid the appearance of  a fishing expedition that may result 
in refusal of the foreign country to execute the request, try not to use phrases such as any and 
all documents. Requests for documents should be as specific as possible. If particular 
procedures to be followed by the foreign court are preferable, include the specifics in the 
Letter Rogatory (for example, verbatim transcript, place witness under oath, or permission 
for U.S. or foreign counsel to attend or participate in proceedings if possible).  
 



:


letter rogatori
letter rogatori ar formal request by the court of on countri to the court of anoth
countri
the inform need for a letter rogatori request is as follow
the fact of the case show at least a reason suspicion that the offens under
investig might have been commit
the name and identifi inform of peopl or entiti involv in the matter
trace illicit transact investig
3852 2011 fraud examin manual
the name and identifi inform of wit or entiti whose name might be
on bank record if account ar held in other name
the name address and other inform concern bank busi or bank
account number
the offens be investig or prosecut in the unit state to includ penalti
the assist request of the foreign countri whether it is document testimoni
freez of asset etc if you want a foreign magistr to question a wit write out
the question that you want the wit to be ask even if you ask to be present dure
the question
the procedur to be follow how to authent busi document and record for
us in us court
the procedur for make formal request by a letter rogatori is as follow
call the oia team handl the relev part of the world concern the search for
guidanc and assist
draft a letter rogatori follow an exemplar or other materi provid by the oia
have the oia repres review and approv the draft
the prosecutor will then file a motion in feder court for issuanc of a letter rogatori
togeth with a memorandum in support and propos order submit two copi on
for the clerk and on for the foreign court to be sign by the judg
the judg sign both letter rogatori
file on sign letter rogatori with the court clerk
have the court clerk authent the second sign letter rogatori either via apostil
or exemplif certif
have the letter rogatori translat into the proper languag
send the sign letter rogatori and translat to the oia for transmiss through
diplomat channel to the proper foreign govern
the minist of justic in the foreign countri normal present the letter rogatori to
the appropri court
the foreign court determin whether to execut the letter rogatori if the
determin is favor the court then obtain the document testimoni and other
inform
evid result from the execut of the letter rogatori is return through
diplomat channel to the oia
the oia will then forward the inform to the prosecutor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3853
letter rogatori should be written in simpl nontechn english and should not includ
unnecessari inform that mai confus court in the receiv foreign state avoid us of
the term discoveri similarli to avoid the appear of a fish expedit that mai result
in refus of the foreign countri to execut the request try not to us phrase such as ani and
all document request for document should be as specif as possibl if particular
procedur to be follow by the foreign court ar prefer includ the specif in the
letter rogatori for exampl verbatim transcript place wit under oath or permiss
for us or foreign counsel to attend or particip in proceed if possibl
