2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM 
 
The criminal justice system involves people and agencies that apprehend and adjudicate 
presumed law-breakers and sanction those who either plead guilty or are convicted of 
violating the law. With white-collar crime, nolo  pleas (nolo contendere : I do not choose to 
dispute the allegations) are also common. Almost invariably, such pleas can reasonably be 
regarded as evidence of criminal guilt. They are generally resorted to in an attempt by the 
defendant to avoid the stigma of a criminal label and to undercut the strength of a possible 
civil suit.  
 
The use of the word system in regard to criminal justice can be misleading since it implies that 
there exists an integrated network of cooperating organizations dedicated to a common 
overarching goal. In actual fact, this is far from true. The jurisdictional morass that marks the 
administration of criminal justice demonstrates that it is far from being a coherent system. 
The police typically are under local control. In most cities, they come under the jurisdiction 
of the mayor or the city manager, though, on rare occasions (such as in St. Louis), law 
enforcement falls under state jurisdiction. The trial courts generally are operated by the 
counties, which also employ prosecutors. The counties—there are slightly more than 3,000 
of them in the United States—also are responsible for the running of the jails, which house 
people awaiting trial that cannot raise or are not allowed bail, and those who are confined on 
misdemeanor charges. In addition, county personnel, in the form of sheriff’s forces, are 
largely responsible for law enforcement in nonurban areas. In some cities, they serve as the 
local police under contractual arrangements. The state runs the appellate courts and the 
prisons where the more serious offenders are housed. In addition, private companies, such 
as the Corrections Corporation of America, have recently begun to take over the operation 
of some holding facilities — both jails and prisons — as part of a profit-making program that 
is legitimized by claims of greater efficiency and lower costs. 
 
In 2008, over 7.3 million people were on probation, in jail or prison, or on parole at year 
end. Criminal justice agencies in the United States employ 2.4 million people. The system 
cost taxpayers more than $68 billion in 2006, and that expense has been rising astronomically 
in the wake of laws that mandate tougher penalties. Because of the fear of such penalties, 
there are fewer plea bargains and more trials. Longer sentences also have come with the 
three-strikes laws that have overtaxed existing penal facilities.  
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice System Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Calculated on a per capita basis, the operation of the criminal justice system in the United 
States costs each taxpayer somewhat more than $200 a year, an amount very similar to what 
is paid for transportation and health care. 
 
Besides local, state, and county law enforcement, there exists a very extensive federal criminal 
justice presence. The federal government forces primarily deal with offenses that cross state 
lines, though when public opinion is aroused, the U.S. Congress has been known to pretend 
that a crime has interstate characteristics in order to bring it under the jurisdiction of agencies 
such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations, which has considerably greater resources than 
most local constabularies. Thus, for instance, kidnapping was made a federal offense after the 
notorious Lindbergh case on the fictitious basis that child-stealers presumptively would carry 
their victim across a state boundary. 
 
Most major prosecutions for white-collar offenses  are generated by federal agencies, in part 
because the majority of laws which proscribe white-collar crime are federal statutes and rules 
of federal regulatory agencies. Additionally, most state and local authorities are more than 
willing to yield jurisdiction to police and prosecutors who have larger personnel pools that 
specialize in complex white-collar crime cases. 
 
 
Sentencing Options 
There are a variety of sanctions available to the judge and, when they are charged with 
imposing sentences, the jury as well. Among others, there is pre-trial diversion, probation, 
and incapacitation or incarceration. If the sentence is imprisonment, it may be made under 
rules that dictate a determinate sentence (such as five years) or an indeterminate sentence 
(such as five to ten years). There are some offenses where the sentence is mandatory and 
dictated by a set of guidelines that typically allow for a decrease or increase of the stipulated 
amount of time to be served if certain other circumstances are present (for instance, whether 
the offender was armed). 
 
Sentencing of white-collar offenders is often complicated by the fact that, while their 
behavior may have been notably harmful, this most likely will be their first criminal offense. 
They also typically come to court with an unblemished record of social accomplishments: 
church participation, seemingly strong family ties, and an array of civil achievements. These 
kinds of credentials work in offenders’ favor when it comes time to impose a sentence upon 
them. Studies of white-collar crime also point out that judges and defendants in such cases 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.303  
often share similar social and educational backgrounds, creating a certain empathy in the 
sentence. Note, for instance, the sentencing memorandum filed on behalf of a client who 
had committed an egregious income tax violation: 
 
In short, the court must pass sentence upon  a man with an unblemished record, whose 
character is one of the highest and whose achievements have been truly outstanding. It is 
submitted that nothing in this record suggests that [the defendant] needs prison 
rehabilitation or that he is ever likely again to break the law. In considering only this man 
as a human being, it is submitted that a prison sentence is unwarranted. The record for 
total good during a life span of 44 years weig hs heavily against the isolated transgression of 
the evasions of taxes. 1  
 
Pre-trial Diversion 
While not truly a sentence since it is not the consequence of a trial or a plea, diversion is 
often used at the local level for offenders who seem suited to what it has to offer. Under its 
terms, selected individuals will be placed into some form of treatment program after they 
have been arrested but before further proceedings. If it is assumed, for instance, that their 
troubles with the criminal law were fundamentally related to alcoholism, they may be 
ordered to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings a certain number of times each week for 
a specified period. Other offenders, particularly  juveniles, might be diverted to different 
kinds of counseling programs or placed in a remedial education group. Referrals to 
employment services might also be mandated. 
 
In theory, a person can be placed in a pre-trial diversion program almost indefinitely, though 
most judges will stipulate a time period. If the person successfully completes the program, a 
criminal record can be avoided. If the accused person fails in the diversion program, usually 
by nonparticipation, he can be tried for the crime that had earlier been charged against him. 
In practice, some judges demonstrate seemingly endless patience with such offenders, since 
they had originally determined that, given the situation, they did not want to imprison the 
alleged offender. 
 
Probation 
Many laypersons confuse probation  with parole. Parole refers to the status of an offender after he 
has been released from prison or jail and is placed under supervision in the community. 
                                                 
1Ibid., p. 222. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Probation typically is a sentence imposed prior to (and instead of) incarceration. Some judges, 
however, favor what is called “shock probation.” They insist that offenders serve a brief 
time—perhaps only a week—in a penal institution in order to get a taste of what can be in 
store for them if they do not adhere to the law and to the probation conditions that are 
imposed upon them.  
 
Probation laws vary from state to state, but the offender typically is placed under the control 
and guidance of a probation officer, who is to see to it that the conditions that are 
established are met. In practice, probation officers tend to be seriously overworked and 
usually provide only minimal supervision of their charges. Most of their contact with the 
probationer may be only by way of telephone calls to the person and the person’s employer. 
Besides, probation officers are expected both to counsel and to control their roster of 
probations—roles that often are incompatible. Few probationers, for instance, will frankly 
discuss personal problems with a probation officer when they are aware that he can use what 
he learns as a basis for sending them to prison. 
 
Most probation agencies are part of the state bu reaucracy, though in larger areas they may be 
operated by the county. About 30 states combine the administration of probation and parole 
in a single agency.  
 
After a person is convicted of a crime, the probation officer is charged with investigating his 
background in order to provide information that will be helpful to the judge in determining 
what punishment to impose. The judge almost invariably will follow the recommendation of 
the probation officer, though some judges, valuing their independence, insist on reports 
without any recommended disposition. Nonetheless, probation officers soon learn what 
matters influence particular judges. If they observe, for instance, that a judge will invariably be 
lenient with an offender who attends church regularly, they will highlight that element if it is 
their own judgment that the defendant deserves a break. They also can pinpoint items that 
they know will influence a given judge to impose a harsher sentence. 
 
Probation implies a contract between the offender and the criminal justice system. Most 
probation rules require that the offender adhere to some or all of the following conditions: 
• Maintain steady employment. 
• Make restitution to the victim for losses or damages. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.305  
• Cooperate with the probation officer. This involves, among other matters, showing up 
for appointments, notifying the officer of change of address, intention to marry, a new 
job, or similar developments. 
• Meet family responsibilities. 
• Obey all laws. Many jurisdictions will incar cerate a probationer as a violator if they 
believe that he has committed another offense. They revoke his probation status, and 
thereby avoid the difficulties of a court proceeding. The probationer can fight this 
disposition and request a hearing, but few are likely to do so successfully. 
 
Rules specifically tailored to the particular offender also might be imposed. Probationers can 
be ordered to report for urinalysis or other forms of drug testing on a regular basis, or they 
can be forbidden to drive or to go to places where alcoholic beverages are served. Until 
relatively recently, most jurisdictions forbade probationers from associating with people who 
had a criminal record. But these are often the only friends a probationer might have, and the 
rule has come to be regarded by many criminal justice personnel as unreasonable and 
unlikely to be obeyed. For probation officers, the rule often affords a basis to revoke the 
freedom of an offender when they believe that he is continuing to violate the law, but they 
are unable to prove this.  
 
Sentences of probation are for a fixed period of time, with the length generally determined 
by statute and in terms of the seriousness of the offense. Violent offenders often are not 
allowed by law to be put on probation.  
 
There have been a number of innovative probation tactics, including house arrests and 
electronic monitoring.2 Under electronic monitoring, the probationer wears equipment that 
allows the probation officer to establish his whereabouts at any time. House arrest usually 
involves confinement to the place where the person lives, typically with an exception made 
for working outside at a job. 
 
Opponents of electronic monitoring see it as a “Big Brother” tactic that reminds them of the 
totalitarian regime depicted by George Orwell in his novel 1984. They also find house arrest 
too similar to the kinds of tactics typically used in some foreign countries to deal with 
“political” criminals. 
                                                 
2See Richard A. Ball, C. Ronald Huff, and J. Robert Lilly, House Arrest and Correctional Policy: Doing Time at 
Home. (Newbury Park, CA:  Sage, 1988). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Given overcrowding problems in prisons, the lower cost of keeping such people on the streets 
offers an attractive alternative; however, there is always the risk that the offender might 
commit a serious crime, thereby eliciting severe public criticism of the judicial and probation 
authorities. A desire to protect their reputation is a major consideration in decisions to impose 
a prison term on a person who arguably could do quite well in a controlled community setting. 
 
White-collar crime offenders are usually regarded as prime candidates for probation. They 
are highly unlikely to reoffend, usually have families to support, and generally express 
remorse and say that they will never again fall into errant habits. Of course, they typically 
make a fine appearance in court: well dressed, well spoken, courteous, and contrite.  
 
White-collar offenders tend to be older and, if imprisoned, might find the atmosphere 
intolerable, though there are a number of federal prisons—scornfully called “country clubs” 
by outsiders—where the population is largely ma de up of “tame” white-collar offenders.  
 
White-collar offenders also will receive lighter sentences if they cooperate with the 
authorities and bear witness against co-conspirators. In one study, it was found that more 
than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with a single offense compared to 
30 percent of uncooperative defendants. White-collar offenders also are more readily granted 
bail: just one person in eight spends any time incarcerated before trial, and for the generally 
high-status offenders, the figure is fewer than one in twenty. In a comparison group of 
“common criminals,” at least one-third spent time in jail before their trial. 3  
 
In early 2010, the SEC announced its initiative to encourage individual and company 
cooperation in investigations by offering Cooperation Agreements, Deferred Prosecution 
Agreements, and Non-Prosecution Agreements. See the updated SEC Enforcement Manual 
at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/enforce/enforcementmanual.pdf  for further details of the 
tools available to the SEC for encouraging cooperation. 
 
Shaming 
Criminologists lately have been paying a great deal of attention to the concept of reintegrative 
shaming  as a punishment that might deter an offender from further wrongdoing. Put forward 
by an Australian, John Braithwaite, (who was the first winner of the Association of Certified 
                                                 
3David Weisburd, Stanton Wheeler, Elin Waring, and Nancy Bode, Crimes of the Middle Classes: White-Collar 
Offenders in the Federal Courts (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.307  
Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award), shaming invo lves two subtle and delicate practices. First, 
pressure is put on the offender by those closest to him, those he respects, and, sometimes, 
those he has victimized to acknowledge that what he did is wrong and to feel truly contrite 
about his deed. Second, the offender is reassured that those important to him continue to 
regard him with affection and welcome him, as a reformed person, back into the fold. 
 
Critics believe that Braithwaite’s ideas, mode led on Chinese and Japanese customs, might in 
theory be extremely effective, but that in cynical societies, such as the United States, they are 
not very likely to have much impact on hardened lawbreakers. 
 
In America, shaming has tended to take a much harsher approach. The tactic was made 
famous by Nathaniel Hawthorne in The Scarlet Letter, in which an adulterer is forced to wear 
the letter “A” sewn into her cloak. Branding on the hand or forehead was used in 
seventeenth century England for thieves and other offenders who were spared the more 
common punishment of death by hanging.  
 
Today, a form of branding characterizes responses to certain criminal offenses. Some states 
require that when an offender is released from prison after serving time for sexual assault on 
a child, members of the community where he will live must be notified of his presence 
among them. Jurisdictions increasingly are resorting to such “shaming” approaches to isolate 
offenders and warn those they presumably might harm. In l996, as a condition of probation, 
a farmer in Pittsfield, Illinois, was required to place a large sign at the entrance of his 
driveway reading: “Warning: A Violent Felon Li ves Here. Travel at Your Own Risk.” The 
offender had hit another farmer in the face with a fuel pump.  
 
Similarly, individuals convicted of drunk driving sometimes have to put special license plates 
on their cars. Shoplifters may be required to take out advertisements in their local papers 
showing their pictures and announcing their offense. 
 
Opponents of such penalties point out that there is little scientific evidence of their value 
and that their legal justification is arguable. They say that the aim of justice is not vengeance 
and humiliation, but to restore what was destroyed and to prevent an illegal act from 
recurring. They do not believe that the shaming approach that is becoming fashionable in 
the United States achieves such ends. 
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Corrections 
Corrections  is one of those euphemistic words that increasingly are entering the language in 
order to soften the reality of a situation. Corrections  is the general term for the process of 
administering punishment following a plea or a conviction in regard to a criminal offense. It 
most typically refers to imprisonment. People serve time in prisons most generally for 
felonies, while jails house individuals convicted of misdemeanors or those awaiting trial who 
have been unable or are not permitted to raise bail to purchase some free time. Generally, 
sentences of a year or less are served in jail; those that are longer involve prison time. 
 
The term corrections  came into usage during a period in which the ruling philosophy was that 
confinement could reform a lawbreaker. Thus, prisons for young persons were rechristened 
as reformatories. The programs—at least in blueprint— focused on education, group therapy, 
skills training, and similar projects geared toward allowing a released inmate to live in a self-fulfilling 
manner after release. Nonetheless, the core of prison existence clearly was  
punitive and most observers regarded the “rehabilitative” programs as little more than 
window-dressing.  
 
Today, the prevailing philosophy undergirding imprisonment is labeled “just deserts”; that is, 
a person who has hurt others and undermined the well-being of society has “earned” 
through his behavior the consequence of deprivation of liberty and the concomitant 
characteristics of imprisonment. There is no need, just desert advocates believe, to coat 
imprisonment with cozy descriptors; it is treatment that an offender deserves because of his 
self-interested illegal behavior. 
 
Incapacitation  is the ruling rationale of the just deserts approach. By definition, imprisonment 
reduces crime by removing the opportunity for the offender to violate the law. There is, of 
course, a considerable level of criminal activity within a correctional institution that primarily 
involves drug-taking and assaults, including sexual assaults. But at least those outside the 
prison are protected from the depredations of those inside it. The key issue is that virtually 
all individuals who are incapacitated in an institutional setting (including those sentenced 
under the three-strikes laws) will someday be released. If they are pushed further into crime 
by their prison experience, it is possible that they might commit more serious offenses upon 
their release than they would have if they were given a lesser or lighter sentence. 
 
It is sometimes argued that white-collar criminals need not be imprisoned since their 
violations most often are tied to the occupational positions they occupy, and thus their 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.309  
patterns of offending can usually be eliminated by removing them from their business or 
professional positions. Doctors will no longer violate the laws governing medical benefit 
programs if their license to practice medicine is revoked, nor will inside traders have the 
chance to carry on their illegal activities if they are barred from trading either directly or by 
proxy. 
 
The difficulty with this reasoning is that incapacitation involves questions of equity; that is, 
whether all those who violate the law are treated similarly, with no favoritism to the wealthy 
and well placed. There also is the matter of general as opposed to specific deterrence. Specific 
deterrence  refers to keeping the individual who broke the law from doing so again. General 
deterrence  involves demonstrating to others the consequences of law-breaking so that they will 
not succumb to the temptation of doing so. Those with philosophical inclinations might 
seek to puzzle out the justice of punishing one person in order to teach other people a 
lesson, but the criminal justice system, not concerned with such esoteric matters, seeks to 
serve the ends of both specific and general deterrence in its response to law violators. 
 
Types of Sentences 
Sentences that involve incapacitation can take several forms. 
 
Determinate Sentences 
A determinate sentence is one of a fixed number of years, usually set by the legislature, to be 
served upon conviction of a certain offense. In so-called “flat” determinate sentences, the 
offender must serve the entire time in prison; say five years for a fraud violation. More often 
(though decreasingly so in many jurisdictions) the flat sentence can be reduced, usually by as 
much as one-third, for “good behavior.” This ca rrot is considered important by some prison 
administrators because it offers a reward for conforming to institutional rules beyond the 
avoidance of punishments meted out within the walls, such as solitary confinement.  
 
A variation on the determinate sentencing approach is for the legislature to set a maximum 
term for any given offense and to allow the sentencing judge to exercise discretion to impose 
a time period up to that maximum. Often an accused person will enter a guilty plea during a 
bargaining session with the prosecution which will stipulate that the person will be 
recommended for a sentence less than the maximum (an agreement which judges almost 
invariably endorse) or that the person will be allowed to plead to a lesser offense than the 
more serious one in order to ensure that the sentence will not exceed a certain amount  
of time. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Indeterminate Sentences 
Indeterminate sentences impose a range of time that can be served by the offender, say five to 
twenty years. This gap allows the correctional authorities to determine when to release the 
prisoner based upon his performance within the institution and an assessment of the 
likelihood that he will continue to pose a danger to the community. Once the most popular 
form of sentencing because it was believed that prison officials possessed the skill and 
wisdom to make accurate judgments about re-offending, indeterminate sentences have come 
into disrepute during the past decades. The objections largely have focused on the inequities 
involved—two people committing the same offense often served vastly different prison 
terms. In addition, prison authorities were deemed to use the indeterminate sentence unfairly 
to take revenge on people they did not like, as a punitive weapon rather than as a  
predictive device.4 
 
Mandatory Sentences and Three-Strikes Law 
Legislatures began adopting mandatory sentences for crimes out of dissatisfaction with what 
they regarded as too-soft judges. The move has been led by the work of the U.S. Sentencing 
Commission. A typical mandatory sentence will disallow parole in the case of certain violent 
crimes or repeat offenses. Similarly, judges will not be permitted to place certain kinds of 
offenders on probation or to suspend their sentence. Most judges, of course, regard this 
inroad against their discretionary powers and autonomy unfavorably. 
 
In one of its more controversial actions, the U.S. Sentencing Commission in November l991 
established rules for sentencing corporations for diverse white-collar offenses. The purpose 
of the rules was to “provide just punishment, adequate deterrence, and incentives for 
organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and reporting 
criminal conduct.” The Commission’s rules reflect the following principles: First, the Court 
must, whenever practicable, order the organization to remedy any harm caused by the 
offenses. The resources expended to remedy the harm should not be viewed as punishment, 
but rather as a means of making victims whole for the harm caused. Second, if the 
organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose or primarily by criminal means, the 
fine should be set sufficiently high to divest the organization of all of its assets. Third, the 
fine range for any organization should be based upon the seriousness of the offense and the 
culpability of the organization. The seriousness of the offense generally will be reflected by 
                                                 
4See further James M. Byrne, Arthur J. Lurigio, and Joan Petersilia, eds., Smart Sentencing: The Emergence of 
Indeterminate Sentences. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1992) 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.311  
the highest of (a) the monetary gain, (b) the monetary loss, or (c) the amount noted in a 
guideline offense fine table. Culpability will generally be determined by the steps taken by the 
organization prior to the offense to prevent and detect criminal conduct, the level and extent 
of involvement in or tolerance of the offense by certain personnel, and the organization’s 
actions since an offense has been committed. 
 
The sentence schedule permits a court to place conditions on the way a business is run if the 
court believes that these changes are important to prevent further offending. Establishing 
more effective accounting procedures, hiring a waste control specialist, or expanding the 
board of directors beyond a group of intimates can be some of the conditions placed upon a 
corporation. On the other hand, if a company has established an internal regimen that seeks 
to control illegal actions, it can receive credit from the court for this in regard to reduction of 
a fine or other stipulated penalties. The sentencing guidelines provide, however, that a 
corporation generally is not eligible for a fine mitigation if the crime was committed by a 
more senior employee with managerial authority.5  
 
Prisons 
William Penn is widely credited with beginning the practice of imprisonment in the United 
States. In England in Penn’s time, capital puni shment was the usual response to most crime, 
with more than 250 designated offenses carrying that penalty. Some mitigation had been 
introduced by the practice of transportation, whereby selected offenders were dispatched to 
the American colonies and, after America gained its freedom from British rule, to Australia. 
 
Of the more than 1,800 prisons in the United States today, 372 are classified as maximum 
security, 480 as medium security, and 969 as minimum security. Since prison construction 
has not kept up with prison populations, overcrowding is a serious problem, and a large 
number of states are under federal court orders to reduce overcrowding and otherwise 
improve prison conditions. 
 
More than four-fifths of prison inmates have a record of prior criminal offenses. More than 
half are incarcerated for violent behavior, and nearly one in five committed the offense to 
obtain money for drugs. Almost nine out of ten jail inmates are adult males. Prior to 
incarceration, the median income of inmates was lower than $10,000 a year. 
                                                 
5For a thorough review of the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Guidelines for organizational offenses see  
Henry J. Amoroso, “Organizational Ethos and Corporate Criminal Liability,” Campbell Law Review, 17  
(1995): 47–70. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Today, the growth in prison populations has been particularly pronounced. In l985, there 
were 313 incarcerated people in the United States per every 100,000 people. That figure rose 
to 509 inmates per 100,000 persons in 2008. The growth largely was fueled by the 
imprisonment of drug offenders. At the end of June 2008, there were 2,310,984 people in 
federal and state prisons and local jails. This represents a rise of 0.8 percent from the end of 
2007, less than the average annual growth of 2.4 percent from 2000–2007.  
 
The total number of people in jail and prisons in the United States has tripled over the last 
several decades as politicians have pressed for tougher sentencing laws and have built more 
prisons to seek to assuage public fears about violent crime. 
 
Critics of prisons continue to argue that the rights of prisoners are too liberal. Prisoners have 
used the courts to seek to obtain greater privileges in regard to religion and speech, medical 
care, vocational and educational training, due process, and general living conditions.  
 
At the same time, prisons have become increasingly violent, particularly as ethnic and racial 
groups clash. Interethnic and racial clashes have led to suggestions that prisoners ought to be 
segregated along racial and ethnic lines to reduce outbreaks of violence.  
 
Federal prisons, which tend to be more richly funded, are regarded as superior to virtually all 
state institutions, and it is in them that most incarcerated white-collar offenders will do  
their time. 
 
There are five different security levels in order to confine offenders in an appropriate 
manner. They are: minimum security, low security, medium security, high security,  
and administrative. 
 
Rehabilitation 
Intense debate in the area of corrections has centered about the question of whether prison 
and other programs can rehabilitate those exposed to them. A famous study by Robert 
Martinson reviewed more than 200 carefully designed research studies of diverse kinds of 
treatment programs for offenders and concluded that none of them showed much, if any, 
ability to turn persons away from a life of crime.6 More recently, some scholars now 
maintain that Martinson’s research was flawed and that his conclusion was inaccurate. They 
                                                 
6Robert Martinson, “What Works? — Questions and Answers About Prison Reform,” Public Interest, 35 
(1974):22-54. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.313  
stress in particular that the error has been to look for improvement in all those who undergo 
one or another kind of treatment regimen; instead, the effort should be to determine what 
works for what kinds of people and to concentrate on these conclusions when formulating 
treatment approaches.7  
 
Certainly, some white-collar offenders have used the incarceration experience to redesign 
their lives, in a manner very much for the better. Charles W. Colson, a onetime special 
assistant to President Nixon, was described by Herbert Klein, Nixon’s intimate friend, as 
“one of the meanest people I ever knew.” Caught up in the Watergate scandal, Colson 
negotiated a guilty plea to one count of obstruction of justice in regard to his involvement in 
the burglary of the office of Daniel Ellsberg in an effort to defame Ellsberg, who had 
released the Pentagon Papers, which showed the falsity of government claims about the 
progress of the Vietnam War. Colson received a one-to-three year prison sentence and was 
fined $5,000. 
 
During his time as an inmate at the Max well federal prison, Colson formed the Prison 
Fellowship, which sought to change the lives of convicts through a combination of 
“practical assistance and relentless evangelism.” 8 So successful was Colson that two decades 
after his release he was awarded the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion, a prize that 
carried a stipend of more than $l million. “Twenty years later I see how God has used my 
life,” Colson noted when receiving the award. “Sometimes the greatest adversities turn out 
to be the greatest blessings.” 
 
Not all white-collar offenders demonstrate so extraordinary a turnabout, but cynics are wont 
to say that if one of the problems involved in maintaining control in America’s turbulent 
prison system has its basis in the lifestyles of many offenders, a “better class of prisoners”— 
that is, more white-collar offenders—mi ght help solve part of that problem. 
 
Jails 
There almost invariably is little in the way of treatment available in jails; they simply 
warehouse prisoners. Jails originated in France in the l600s, and through the centuries, they 
                                                 
7Francis T. Cullen and Paul Gendreau, “The Effectiveness of Correctional Treatment: Reconsidered the 
‘Nothing Works’ Debate,” in Lynne Goodstein and Doris Layton MacKenzie, eds., The American Prison: 
Issues in Research and Policy (New York: Plenum Press, 1989), pp. 24–30. 
8T. Carlson, “Deliver Us From Evil:  Prison Fellowship’s Saving Gra ce,” Policy Review, 62 (1992):72–22; see 
Charles W. Colson, Born Again (Old Tappan, NJ:  Chosen Books, 1976) Colson, Life Sentence (Minneapolis:  
World Wide, 1979). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
have been regarded as hellholes of pestilence and cruelty. In medieval England, a jail 
sentence was regarded as a sentence to death since conditions were so abominable. Today, 
more than 8 million people are placed in jails each year, some for several stays. The great 
majority are poorly educated, unemployed, impoverished, and drug ridden. 
 
Community-Based Corrections 
To ease overcrowding, community-based correctional facilities have become commonplace. 
While some people might be sentenced directly to such programs, they typically house 
individuals who have completed time inside institutional walls. Community-based programs 
emphasize the use of neighborhood residential re-entry centers (also known as halfway 
houses), comprehensive sanction centers, and home confinement.  
 
Parole  
Parole (derived from the French and meaning “word,” as in “word of honor”) is the planned 
release and community supervision of offenders before the expiration of their sentence. 
Under most state laws, an offender is eligible for parole after serving one-third of his 
sentence. Parole decisions usually are made by a board or a commission, based on its 
members’ conclusion regarding whether the offe nder will remain at liberty without violating 
the law. There is pressure on parole board members to be notably conservative in their 
actions, because any repetition of an offense by someone they release, particularly if the 
offense is heinous, will trigger community outrage against the board. On the other hand, 
overcrowded prison conditions dictate early release to make room for newcomers. 
 
Parole is considered an act of grace, and once on parole, the inmate is supposed to be  
closely supervised by a parole officer, though this rarely happens because of extraordinarily 
heavy caseloads.  
 
Pardons 
A person may apply for a pardon that, if granted, releases him from further punishment and 
restores the civil rights that are forfeited upon conviction for a crime, including the right to 
vote, to serve on a jury, or to hold public office. 
 
There are two types of pardons — (l) full and absolute and (2) conditional. Full and absolute 
pardons usually are granted only after conviction and upon a presumptive showing that the 
offender was actually innocent. The full and absolute pardon that Richard Nixon received 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.315  
from President Gerald Ford before possible criminal proceedings had begun was a rare 
exception to this rule. 
 
A conditional pardon implies guilt, and for this reason, may be rejected by the person to 
whom it is offered. The grant of a pardon or other clemency is the prerogative of the 
executive branch (the president or state governors) and may not be compelled by the 
petitioner or by the judiciary. 
 
 
Crime Statistics 
 
Uniform Crime Reports 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) compiles statistics on the extent of crime in the 
United States in a document called the Uniform Crime Report (UCR). The report is put 
together on the basis of information voluntarily submitted by more than l5,000 law 
enforcement departments. This includes virtually every significant public policing agency in 
the country. 
 
The UCR divides crimes into Part I and Part II offenses. Part I offenses are murder and 
non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, 
arson, and auto theft. While most people would agree that these categories appear to 
incorporate most serious criminal behavior, the somewhat arbitrary nature of the categories 
should not be overlooked. In regard to rape, for instance, the category also embraces 
attempted rape, and studies have shown that men may be arrested for attempted rape for 
behaviors no more ominous (at least in comparison with forcible rape) than patting a female 
stranger on the behind in a rather menacing way. The police charge a serious crime in order 
to more readily persuade the offender to plead to a lesser offense. 
  
The inclusion of arson on the list of major offenses illustrates that political concern enters 
into the compilations. It was added to the FBI Part I tables about a decade ago when 
legislators decided that the offense needed to be highlighted and mandated that the FBI 
upgrade it. 
 
Part II offenses include most other violations, though they omit traffic offenses and pay no 
heed to serious white-collar crime. When they do mention offenses that might fall into the 
white-collar category, often what they are tabulating as offenses includes crimes that might 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
otherwise not be considered white-collar. For example, for classification purposes, forgery  
includes the passing of bad checks by drug addicts without bank accounts. When you add in 
theft of services, welfare fraud, petty confidence games, and credit card fraud, you can 
account for virtually all of the crimes charged under possible white-collar crime headings. 
 
The UCR figures are based on what is called “offenses known to the police.” Data is also 
provided on arrests, though not on whether the case is resolved by a determination of guilt. 
Rates are reported per 100,000 persons, a matter which skews the crime picture in some 
jurisdictions. In Las Vegas, for instance, the crime rate is higher per capita than it reasonably 
ought to be because the figures pay no heed to the very large tourist influx. 
 
National Crime Survey 
The National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) is a statistical study carried out by the 
Bureau of the Census that annually conducts interviews with 51,000 individuals about 
experiences of crime victimization. It shows UCR seriously underreporting; that is, the 
persons interviewed report a much greater amount of crime than that which figures in the 
UCR reports. About 55 percent of crimes of violence and one-quarter of thefts are found to 
be reported to the police. The NCS makes no attempt to measure any behaviors that would 
fit into the category of white-collar crime. 
 
The UCR results show that crime victims and offenders share the same demographic 
characteristics. The average victim is young, male, uneducated, and poor. A somewhat 
counterintuitive result is that as wealth increases, the likelihood of being a victim of violence 
or burglary decreases. However, wealth is correlated positively with victimization by personal 
theft and larceny. 
 
Self-Report Surveys 
Self-report surveys typically involve a questionnaire on which a respondent indicates which 
offenses he has committed and how often he has done so within a specified period of time. 
They invariably are administered to juveniles because youngsters can more readily be located 
(in classrooms, for instance) and will be more likely to cooperate with the researcher, at least 
if they are persuaded by the guarantee of anonymity. 
 
The surveys show that the most common juvenile offenses are truancy, alcohol use, and 
recourse to false identification, typically to gain entrance to a place out-of-bounds for 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.317  
underage persons or to buy liquor. Very few youngsters do not commit any offense at all 
that, if known and taken seriously, could not result in official action against them. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.401  



:


punish and the crimin justic system
the crimin justic system involv peopl and agenc that apprehend and adjud
presum lawbreak and sanction those who either plead guilti or ar convict of
violat the law with whitecollar crime nolo plea nolo contender i do not choos to
disput the alleg ar also common almost invari such plea can reason be
regard as evid of crimin guilt thei ar gener resort to in an attempt by the
defend to avoid the stigma of a crimin label and to undercut the strength of a possibl
civil suit
the us of the word system in regard to crimin justic can be mislead sinc it impli that
there exist an integr network of cooper organ dedic to a common
overarch goal in actual fact thi is far from true the jurisdict morass that mark the
administr of crimin justic demonstr that it is far from be a coher system
the polic typic ar under local control in most citi thei come under the jurisdict
of the mayor or the citi manag though on rare occas such as in st loui law
enforc fall under state jurisdict the trial court gener ar oper by the
counti which also emploi prosecutor the countiesther ar slightli more than 3000
of them in the unit statesalso ar respons for the run of the jail which hous
peopl await trial that cannot rais or ar not allow bail and those who ar confin on
misdemeanor charg in addit counti personnel in the form of sheriff forc ar
larg respons for law enforc in nonurban area in some citi thei serv as the
local polic under contractu arrang the state run the appel court and the
prison where the more seriou offend ar hous in addit privat compani such
as the correct corpor of america have recent begun to take over the oper
of some hold facil both jail and prison as part of a profitmak program that
is legitim by claim of greater effici and lower cost
in 2008 over 73 million peopl were on probat in jail or prison or on parol at year
end crimin justic agenc in the unit state emploi 24 million peopl the system
cost taxpay more than 68 billion in 2006 and that expens ha been rise astronom
in the wake of law that mandat tougher penalti becaus of the fear of such penalti
there ar fewer plea bargain and more trial longer sentenc also have come with the
threestrik law that have overtax exist penal facil
punish and the crimin justic system fraud prevent and deterr
4302 2011 fraud examin manual
calcul on a per capita basi the oper of the crimin justic system in the unit
state cost each taxpay somewhat more than 200 a year an amount veri similar to what
is paid for transport and health care
besid local state and counti law enforc there exist a veri extens feder crimin
justic presenc the feder govern forc primarili deal with offens that cross state
line though when public opinion is arous the us congress ha been known to pretend
that a crime ha interst characterist in order to bring it under the jurisdict of agenc
such as the feder bureau of investig which ha consider greater resourc than
most local constabulari thu for instanc kidnap wa made a feder offens after the
notori lindbergh case on the fictiti basi that childsteal presumpt would carri
their victim across a state boundari
most major prosecut for whitecollar offens ar gener by feder agenc in part
becaus the major of law which proscrib whitecollar crime ar feder statut and rule
of feder regulatori agenc addition most state and local author ar more than
will to yield jurisdict to polic and prosecutor who have larger personnel pool that
special in complex whitecollar crime case
sentenc option
there ar a varieti of sanction avail to the judg and when thei ar charg with
impos sentenc the juri as well among other there is pretrial divers probat
and incapacit or incarcer if the sentenc is imprison it mai be made under
rule that dictat a determin sentenc such as five year or an indetermin sentenc
such as five to ten year there ar some offens where the sentenc is mandatori and
dictat by a set of guidelin that typic allow for a decreas or increas of the stipul
amount of time to be serv if certain other circumst ar present for instanc whether
the offend wa arm
sentenc of whitecollar offend is often complic by the fact that while their
behavior mai have been notabl harm thi most like will be their first crimin offens
thei also typic come to court with an unblemish record of social accomplish
church particip seemingli strong famili ti and an arrai of civil achiev these
kind of credenti work in offend favor when it come time to impos a sentenc upon
them studi of whitecollar crime also point out that judg and defend in such case
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4303
often share similar social and educ background creat a certain empathi in the
sentenc note for instanc the sentenc memorandum file on behalf of a client who
had commit an egregi incom tax violat
in short the court must pass sentenc upon a man with an unblemish record whose
charact is on of the highest and whose achiev have been truli outstand it is
submit that noth in thi record suggest that the defend need prison
rehabilit or that he is ever like again to break the law in consid onli thi man
as a human be it is submit that a prison sentenc is unwarr the record for
total good dure a life span of 44 year weig hs heavili against the isol transgress of
the evas of tax 1
pretrial divers
while not truli a sentenc sinc it is not the consequ of a trial or a plea divers is
often us at the local level for offend who seem suit to what it ha to offer under it
term select individu will be place into some form of treatment program after thei
have been arrest but befor further proceed if it is assum for instanc that their
troubl with the crimin law were fundament relat to alcohol thei mai be
order to attend alcohol anonym meet a certain number of time each week for
a specifi period other offend particularli juvenil might be divert to differ
kind of counsel program or place in a remedi educ group referr to
employ servic might also be mandat
in theori a person can be place in a pretrial divers program almost indefinit though
most judg will stipul a time period if the person successfulli complet the program a
crimin record can be avoid if the accus person fail in the divers program usual
by nonparticip he can be tri for the crime that had earlier been charg against him
in practic some judg demonstr seemingli endless patienc with such offend sinc
thei had origin determin that given the situat thei did not want to imprison the
alleg offend
probat
mani layperson confus probat with parol parol refer to the statu of an offend after he
ha been releas from prison or jail and is place under supervis in the commun
1ibid p 222
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4304 2011 fraud examin manual
probat typic is a sentenc impos prior to and instead of incarcer some judg
howev favor what is call shock probat thei insist that offend serv a brief
timeperhap onli a weekin a penal institut in order to get a tast of what can be in
store for them if thei do not adher to the law and to the probat condit that ar
impos upon them
probat law vari from state to state but the offend typic is place under the control
and guidanc of a probat offic who is to see to it that the condit that ar
establish ar met in practic probat offic tend to be serious overwork and
usual provid onli minim supervis of their charg most of their contact with the
probation mai be onli by wai of telephon call to the person and the person employ
besid probat offic ar expect both to counsel and to control their roster of
probationsrol that often ar incompat few probation for instanc will frankli
discuss person problem with a probat offic when thei ar awar that he can us what
he learn as a basi for send them to prison
most probat agenc ar part of the state bu reaucraci though in larger area thei mai be
oper by the counti about 30 state combin the administr of probat and parol
in a singl agenc
after a person is convict of a crime the probat offic is charg with investig hi
background in order to provid inform that will be help to the judg in determin
what punish to impos the judg almost invari will follow the recommend of
the probat offic though some judg valu their independ insist on report
without ani recommend disposit nonetheless probat offic soon learn what
matter influenc particular judg if thei observ for instanc that a judg will invari be
lenient with an offend who attend church regularli thei will highlight that element if it is
their own judgment that the defend deserv a break thei also can pinpoint item that
thei know will influenc a given judg to impos a harsher sentenc
probat impli a contract between the offend and the crimin justic system most
probat rule requir that the offend adher to some or all of the follow condit
maintain steadi employ
make restitut to the victim for loss or damag
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4305
cooper with the probat offic thi involv among other matter show up
for appoint notifi the offic of chang of address intent to marri a new
job or similar develop
meet famili respons
obei all law mani jurisdict will incar cerat a probation as a violat if thei
believ that he ha commit anoth offens thei revok hi probat statu and
therebi avoid the difficulti of a court proceed the probation can fight thi
disposit and request a hear but few ar like to do so successfulli
rule specif tailor to the particular offend also might be impos probation can
be order to report for urinalysi or other form of drug test on a regular basi or thei
can be forbidden to drive or to go to place where alcohol beverag ar serv until
rel recent most jurisdict forbad probation from associ with peopl who
had a crimin record but these ar often the onli friend a probation might have and the
rule ha come to be regard by mani crimin justic personnel as unreason and
unlik to be obei for probat offic the rule often afford a basi to revok the
freedom of an offend when thei believ that he is continu to violat the law but thei
ar unabl to prove thi
sentenc of probat ar for a fix period of time with the length gener determin
by statut and in term of the serious of the offens violent offend often ar not
allow by law to be put on probat
there have been a number of innov probat tactic includ hous arrest and
electron monitoring2 under electron monitor the probation wear equip that
allow the probat offic to establish hi whereabout at ani time hous arrest usual
involv confin to the place where the person live typic with an except made
for work outsid at a job
oppon of electron monitor see it as a big brother tactic that remind them of the
totalitarian regim depict by georg orwel in hi novel 1984 thei also find hous arrest
too similar to the kind of tactic typic us in some foreign countri to deal with
polit crimin
2see richard a ball c ronald huff and j robert lilli hous arrest and correct polici do time at
home newburi park ca sage 1988
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4306 2011 fraud examin manual
given overcrowd problem in prison the lower cost of keep such peopl on the street
offer an attract altern howev there is alwai the risk that the offend might
commit a seriou crime therebi elicit sever public critic of the judici and probat
author a desir to protect their reput is a major consider in decis to impos
a prison term on a person who arguabl could do quit well in a control commun set
whitecollar crime offend ar usual regard as prime candid for probat thei
ar highli unlik to reoffend usual have famili to support and gener express
remors and sai that thei will never again fall into errant habit of cours thei typic
make a fine appear in court well dress well spoken courteou and contrit
whitecollar offend tend to be older and if imprison might find the atmospher
intoler though there ar a number of feder prisonsscornfulli call countri club
by outsiderswher the popul is larg ma de up of tame whitecollar offend
whitecollar offend also will receiv lighter sentenc if thei cooper with the
author and bear wit against coconspir in on studi it wa found that more
than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with a singl offens compar to
30 percent of uncoop defend whitecollar offend also ar more readili grant
bail just on person in eight spend ani time incarcer befor trial and for the gener
highstatu offend the figur is fewer than on in twenti in a comparison group of
common crimin at least onethird spent time in jail befor their trial 3
in earli 2010 the sec announc it initi to encourag individu and compani
cooper in investig by offer cooper agreement defer prosecut
agreement and nonprosecut agreement see the updat sec enforc manual
at httpwwwsecgovdivisionsenforceenforcementmanualpdf for further detail of the
tool avail to the sec for encourag cooper
shame
criminologist late have been pai a great deal of attent to the concept of reintegr
shame as a punish that might deter an offend from further wrongdo put forward
by an australian john braithwait who wa the first winner of the associ of certifi
3david weisburd stanton wheeler elin ware and nanci bode crime of the middl class whitecollar
offend in the feder court new haven yale univers press 1991
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4307
fraud examin cressei award shame invo lve two subtl and delic practic first
pressur is put on the offend by those closest to him those he respect and sometim
those he ha victim to acknowledg that what he did is wrong and to feel truli contrit
about hi deed second the offend is reassur that those import to him continu to
regard him with affect and welcom him as a reform person back into the fold
critic believ that braithwait idea mode led on chines and japanes custom might in
theori be extrem effect but that in cynic societi such as the unit state thei ar
not veri like to have much impact on harden lawbreak
in america shame ha tend to take a much harsher approach the tactic wa made
famou by nathaniel hawthorn in the scarlet letter in which an adulter is forc to wear
the letter a sewn into her cloak brand on the hand or forehead wa us in
seventeenth centuri england for thiev and other offend who were spare the more
common punish of death by hang
todai a form of brand character respons to certain crimin offens some state
requir that when an offend is releas from prison after serv time for sexual assault on
a child member of the commun where he will live must be notifi of hi presenc
among them jurisdict increasingli ar resort to such shame approach to isol
offend and warn those thei presum might harm in l996 as a condit of probat
a farmer in pittsfield illinoi wa requir to place a larg sign at the entranc of hi
drivewai read warn a violent felon li ve here travel at your own risk the
offend had hit anoth farmer in the face with a fuel pump
similarli individu convict of drunk drive sometim have to put special licens plate
on their car shoplift mai be requir to take out advertis in their local paper
show their pictur and announc their offens
oppon of such penalti point out that there is littl scientif evid of their valu
and that their legal justif is arguabl thei sai that the aim of justic is not vengeanc
and humili but to restor what wa destroi and to prevent an illeg act from
recur thei do not believ that the shame approach that is becom fashion in
the unit state achiev such end
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4308 2011 fraud examin manual
correct
correct is on of those euphemist word that increasingli ar enter the languag in
order to soften the realiti of a situat correct is the gener term for the process of
administ punish follow a plea or a convict in regard to a crimin offens it
most typic refer to imprison peopl serv time in prison most gener for
feloni while jail hous individu convict of misdemeanor or those await trial who
have been unabl or ar not permit to rais bail to purchas some free time gener
sentenc of a year or less ar serv in jail those that ar longer involv prison time
the term correct came into usag dure a period in which the rule philosophi wa that
confin could reform a lawbreak thu prison for young person were rechristen
as reformatori the programsat least in blueprint focus on educ group therapi
skill train and similar project gear toward allow a releas inmat to live in a selffulfil
manner after releas nonetheless the core of prison exist clearli wa
punit and most observ regard the rehabilit program as littl more than
windowdress
todai the prevail philosophi undergird imprison is label just desert that is
a person who ha hurt other and undermin the wellb of societi ha earn
through hi behavior the consequ of depriv of liberti and the concomit
characterist of imprison there is no need just desert advoc believ to coat
imprison with cozi descriptor it is treatment that an offend deserv becaus of hi
selfinterest illeg behavior
incapacit is the rule rational of the just desert approach by definit imprison
reduc crime by remov the opportun for the offend to violat the law there is of
cours a consider level of crimin activ within a correct institut that primarili
involv drugtak and assault includ sexual assault but at least those outsid the
prison ar protect from the depred of those insid it the kei issu is that virtual
all individu who ar incapacit in an institut set includ those sentenc
under the threestrik law will somedai be releas if thei ar push further into crime
by their prison experi it is possibl that thei might commit more seriou offens upon
their releas than thei would have if thei were given a lesser or lighter sentenc
it is sometim argu that whitecollar crimin need not be imprison sinc their
violat most often ar ti to the occup posit thei occupi and thu their
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4309
pattern of offend can usual be elimin by remov them from their busi or
profession posit doctor will no longer violat the law govern medic benefit
program if their licens to practic medicin is revok nor will insid trader have the
chanc to carri on their illeg activ if thei ar bar from trade either directli or by
proxi
the difficulti with thi reason is that incapacit involv question of equiti that is
whether all those who violat the law ar treat similarli with no favorit to the wealthi
and well place there also is the matter of gener as oppos to specif deterr specif
deterr refer to keep the individu who broke the law from do so again gener
deterr involv demonstr to other the consequ of lawbreak so that thei will
not succumb to the temptat of do so those with philosoph inclin might
seek to puzzl out the justic of punish on person in order to teach other peopl a
lesson but the crimin justic system not concern with such esoter matter seek to
serv the end of both specif and gener deterr in it respons to law violat
type of sentenc
sentenc that involv incapacit can take sever form
determin sentenc
a determin sentenc is on of a fix number of year usual set by the legislatur to be
serv upon convict of a certain offens in socal flat determin sentenc the
offend must serv the entir time in prison sai five year for a fraud violat more often
though decreasingli so in mani jurisdict the flat sentenc can be reduc usual by as
much as onethird for good behavior thi ca rrot is consid import by some prison
administr becaus it offer a reward for conform to institut rule beyond the
avoid of punish mete out within the wall such as solitari confin
a variat on the determin sentenc approach is for the legislatur to set a maximum
term for ani given offens and to allow the sentenc judg to exercis discret to impos
a time period up to that maximum often an accus person will enter a guilti plea dure a
bargain session with the prosecut which will stipul that the person will be
recommend for a sentenc less than the maximum an agreement which judg almost
invari endors or that the person will be allow to plead to a lesser offens than the
more seriou on in order to ensur that the sentenc will not exce a certain amount
of time
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4310 2011 fraud examin manual
indetermin sentenc
indetermin sentenc impos a rang of time that can be serv by the offend sai five to
twenti year thi gap allow the correct author to determin when to releas the
prison base upon hi perform within the institut and an assess of the
likelihood that he will continu to pose a danger to the commun onc the most popular
form of sentenc becaus it wa believ that prison offici possess the skill and
wisdom to make accur judgment about reoffend indetermin sentenc have come
into disreput dure the past decad the object larg have focus on the inequ
involvedtwo peopl commit the same offens often serv vastli differ prison
term in addit prison author were deem to us the indetermin sentenc unfairli
to take reveng on peopl thei did not like as a punit weapon rather than as a
predict device4
mandatori sentenc and threestrik law
legislatur began adopt mandatori sentenc for crime out of dissatisfact with what
thei regard as toosoft judg the move ha been led by the work of the us sentenc
commiss a typic mandatori sentenc will disallow parol in the case of certain violent
crime or repeat offens similarli judg will not be permit to place certain kind of
offend on probat or to suspend their sentenc most judg of cours regard thi
inroad against their discretionari power and autonomi unfavor
in on of it more controversi action the us sentenc commiss in novemb l991
establish rule for sentenc corpor for divers whitecollar offens the purpos
of the rule wa to provid just punish adequ deterr and incent for
organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and report
crimin conduct the commiss rule reflect the follow principl first the court
must whenev practic order the organ to remedi ani harm caus by the
offens the resourc expend to remedi the harm should not be view as punish
but rather as a mean of make victim whole for the harm caus second if the
organ oper primarili for a crimin purpos or primarili by crimin mean the
fine should be set suffici high to divest the organ of all of it asset third the
fine rang for ani organ should be base upon the serious of the offens and the
culpabl of the organ the serious of the offens gener will be reflect by
4see further jame m byrn arthur j lurigio and joan petersilia ed smart sentenc the emerg of
indetermin sentenc newburi park ca sage 1992
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4311
the highest of a the monetari gain b the monetari loss or c the amount note in a
guidelin offens fine tabl culpabl will gener be determin by the step taken by the
organ prior to the offens to prevent and detect crimin conduct the level and extent
of involv in or toler of the offens by certain personnel and the organ
action sinc an offens ha been commit
the sentenc schedul permit a court to place condit on the wai a busi is run if the
court believ that these chang ar import to prevent further offend establish
more effect account procedur hire a wast control specialist or expand the
board of director beyond a group of intim can be some of the condit place upon a
corpor on the other hand if a compani ha establish an intern regimen that seek
to control illeg action it can receiv credit from the court for thi in regard to reduct of
a fine or other stipul penalti the sentenc guidelin provid howev that a
corpor gener is not elig for a fine mitig if the crime wa commit by a
more senior employe with manageri authority5
prison
william penn is wide credit with begin the practic of imprison in the unit
state in england in penn time capit puni shment wa the usual respons to most crime
with more than 250 design offens carri that penalti some mitig had been
introduc by the practic of transport wherebi select offend were dispatch to
the american coloni and after america gain it freedom from british rule to australia
of the more than 1800 prison in the unit state todai 372 ar classifi as maximum
secur 480 as medium secur and 969 as minimum secur sinc prison construct
ha not kept up with prison popul overcrowd is a seriou problem and a larg
number of state ar under feder court order to reduc overcrowd and otherwis
improv prison condit
more than fourfifth of prison inmat have a record of prior crimin offens more than
half ar incarcer for violent behavior and nearli on in five commit the offens to
obtain monei for drug almost nine out of ten jail inmat ar adult male prior to
incarcer the median incom of inmat wa lower than 10000 a year
5for a thorough review of the us sentenc commiss guidelin for organiz offens see
henri j amoroso organiz etho and corpor crimin liabil campbel law review 17
1995 4770
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4312 2011 fraud examin manual
todai the growth in prison popul ha been particularli pronounc in l985 there
were 313 incarcer peopl in the unit state per everi 100000 peopl that figur rose
to 509 inmat per 100000 person in 2008 the growth larg wa fuel by the
imprison of drug offend at the end of june 2008 there were 2310984 peopl in
feder and state prison and local jail thi repres a rise of 08 percent from the end of
2007 less than the averag annual growth of 24 percent from 20002007
the total number of peopl in jail and prison in the unit state ha tripl over the last
sever decad as politician have press for tougher sentenc law and have built more
prison to seek to assuag public fear about violent crime
critic of prison continu to argu that the right of prison ar too liber prison have
us the court to seek to obtain greater privileg in regard to religion and speech medic
care vocat and educ train due process and gener live condit
at the same time prison have becom increasingli violent particularli as ethnic and racial
group clash interethn and racial clash have led to suggest that prison ought to be
segreg along racial and ethnic line to reduc outbreak of violenc
feder prison which tend to be more richli fund ar regard as superior to virtual all
state institut and it is in them that most incarcer whitecollar offend will do
their time
there ar five differ secur level in order to confin offend in an appropri
manner thei ar minimum secur low secur medium secur high secur
and administr
rehabilit
intens debat in the area of correct ha center about the question of whether prison
and other program can rehabilit those expos to them a famou studi by robert
martinson review more than 200 carefulli design research studi of divers kind of
treatment program for offend and conclud that none of them show much if ani
abil to turn person awai from a life of crime6 more recent some scholar now
maintain that martinson research wa flaw and that hi conclus wa inaccur thei
6robert martinson what work question and answer about prison reform public interest 35
19742254
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4313
stress in particular that the error ha been to look for improv in all those who undergo
on or anoth kind of treatment regimen instead the effort should be to determin what
work for what kind of peopl and to concentr on these conclus when formul
treatment approaches7
certainli some whitecollar offend have us the incarcer experi to redesign
their live in a manner veri much for the better charl w colson a onetim special
assist to presid nixon wa describ by herbert klein nixon intim friend as
on of the meanest peopl i ever knew caught up in the waterg scandal colson
negoti a guilti plea to on count of obstruct of justic in regard to hi involv in
the burglari of the offic of daniel ellsberg in an effort to defam ellsberg who had
releas the pentagon paper which show the falsiti of govern claim about the
progress of the vietnam war colson receiv a onetothre year prison sentenc and wa
fine 5000
dure hi time as an inmat at the max well feder prison colson form the prison
fellowship which sought to chang the live of convict through a combin of
practic assist and relentless evangel 8 so success wa colson that two decad
after hi releas he wa award the templeton prize for progress in religion a prize that
carri a stipend of more than l million twenti year later i see how god ha us my
life colson note when receiv the award sometim the greatest advers turn out
to be the greatest bless
not all whitecollar offend demonstr so extraordinari a turnabout but cynic ar wont
to sai that if on of the problem involv in maintain control in america turbul
prison system ha it basi in the lifestyl of mani offend a better class of prison
that is more whitecollar offendersmi ght help solv part of that problem
jail
there almost invari is littl in the wai of treatment avail in jail thei simpli
warehous prison jail origin in franc in the l600 and through the centuri thei
7franci t cullen and paul gendreau the effect of correct treatment reconsid the
noth work debat in lynn goodstein and dori layton mackenzi ed the american prison
issu in research and polici new york plenum press 1989 pp 2430
8t carlson deliv us from evil prison fellowship save gra ce polici review 62 19927222 see
charl w colson born again old tappan nj chosen book 1976 colson life sentenc minneapoli
world wide 1979
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4314 2011 fraud examin manual
have been regard as hellhol of pestil and cruelti in mediev england a jail
sentenc wa regard as a sentenc to death sinc condit were so abomin todai
more than 8 million peopl ar place in jail each year some for sever stai the great
major ar poorli educ unemploi impoverish and drug ridden
communitybas correct
to eas overcrowd communitybas correct facil have becom commonplac
while some peopl might be sentenc directli to such program thei typic hous
individu who have complet time insid institut wall communitybas program
emphas the us of neighborhood residenti reentri center also known as halfwai
hous comprehens sanction center and home confin
parol
parol deriv from the french and mean word as in word of honor is the plan
releas and commun supervis of offend befor the expir of their sentenc
under most state law an offend is elig for parol after serv onethird of hi
sentenc parol decis usual ar made by a board or a commiss base on it
member conclus regard whether the off nder will remain at liberti without violat
the law there is pressur on parol board member to be notabl conserv in their
action becaus ani repetit of an offens by someon thei releas particularli if the
offens is heinou will trigger commun outrag against the board on the other hand
overcrowd prison condit dictat earli releas to make room for newcom
parol is consid an act of grace and onc on parol the inmat is suppos to be
close supervis by a parol offic though thi rare happen becaus of extraordinarili
heavi caseload
pardon
a person mai appli for a pardon that if grant releas him from further punish and
restor the civil right that ar forfeit upon convict for a crime includ the right to
vote to serv on a juri or to hold public offic
there ar two type of pardon l full and absolut and 2 condit full and absolut
pardon usual ar grant onli after convict and upon a presumpt show that the
offend wa actual innoc the full and absolut pardon that richard nixon receiv
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4315
from presid gerald ford befor possibl crimin proceed had begun wa a rare
except to thi rule
a condit pardon impli guilt and for thi reason mai be reject by the person to
whom it is offer the grant of a pardon or other clemenc is the prerog of the
execut branch the presid or state governor and mai not be compel by the
petition or by the judiciari
crime statist
uniform crime report
the feder bureau of investig fbi compil statist on the extent of crime in the
unit state in a document call the uniform crime report ucr the report is put
togeth on the basi of inform voluntarili submit by more than l5000 law
enforc depart thi includ virtual everi signific public polic agenc in
the countri
the ucr divid crime into part i and part ii offens part i offens ar murder and
nonneglig manslaught forcibl rape robberi aggrav assault burglari larceni
arson and auto theft while most peopl would agre that these categori appear to
incorpor most seriou crimin behavior the somewhat arbitrari natur of the categori
should not be overlook in regard to rape for instanc the categori also embrac
attempt rape and studi have shown that men mai be arrest for attempt rape for
behavior no more omin at least in comparison with forcibl rape than pat a femal
stranger on the behind in a rather menac wai the polic charg a seriou crime in order
to more readili persuad the offend to plead to a lesser offens
the inclus of arson on the list of major offens illustr that polit concern enter
into the compil it wa ad to the fbi part i tabl about a decad ago when
legisl decid that the offens need to be highlight and mandat that the fbi
upgrad it
part ii offens includ most other violat though thei omit traffic offens and pai no
heed to seriou whitecollar crime when thei do mention offens that might fall into the
whitecollar categori often what thei ar tabul as offens includ crime that might
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4316 2011 fraud examin manual
otherwis not be consid whitecollar for exampl for classif purpos forgeri
includ the pass of bad check by drug addict without bank account when you add in
theft of servic welfar fraud petti confid game and credit card fraud you can
account for virtual all of the crime charg under possibl whitecollar crime head
the ucr figur ar base on what is call offens known to the polic data is also
provid on arrest though not on whether the case is resolv by a determin of guilt
rate ar report per 100000 person a matter which skew the crime pictur in some
jurisdict in la vega for instanc the crime rate is higher per capita than it reason
ought to be becaus the figur pai no heed to the veri larg tourist influx
nation crime survei
the nation crime victim survei ncv is a statist studi carri out by the
bureau of the censu that annual conduct interview with 51000 individu about
experi of crime victim it show ucr serious underreport that is the
person interview report a much greater amount of crime than that which figur in the
ucr report about 55 percent of crime of violenc and onequart of theft ar found to
be report to the polic the nc make no attempt to measur ani behavior that would
fit into the categori of whitecollar crime
the ucr result show that crime victim and offend share the same demograph
characterist the averag victim is young male uneduc and poor a somewhat
counterintuit result is that as wealth increas the likelihood of be a victim of violenc
or burglari decreas howev wealth is correl posit with victim by person
theft and larceni
selfreport survei
selfreport survei typic involv a questionnair on which a respond indic which
offens he ha commit and how often he ha done so within a specifi period of time
thei invari ar administ to juvenil becaus youngster can more readili be locat
in classroom for instanc and will be more like to cooper with the research at least
if thei ar persuad by the guarante of anonym
the survei show that the most common juvenil offens ar truanci alcohol us and
recours to fals identif typic to gain entranc to a place outofbound for
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4317
underag person or to bui liquor veri few youngster do not commit ani offens at all
that if known and taken serious could not result in offici action against them
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4401
