2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Sentencing Options


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Sentencing Options 
There are a variety of sanctions available to the judge and, when they are charged with 
imposing sentences, the jury as well. Among others, there is pre-trial diversion, probation, 
and incapacitation or incarceration. If the sentence is imprisonment, it may be made under 
rules that dictate a determinate sentence (such as five years) or an indeterminate sentence 
(such as five to ten years). There are some offenses where the sentence is mandatory and 
dictated by a set of guidelines that typically allow for a decrease or increase of the stipulated 
amount of time to be served if certain other circumstances are present (for instance, whether 
the offender was armed). 
 
Sentencing of white-collar offenders is often complicated by the fact that, while their 
behavior may have been notably harmful, this most likely will be their first criminal offense. 
They also typically come to court with an unblemished record of social accomplishments: 
church participation, seemingly strong family ties, and an array of civil achievements. These 
kinds of credentials work in offenders’ favor when it comes time to impose a sentence upon 
them. Studies of white-collar crime also point out that judges and defendants in such cases 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.303  
often share similar social and educational backgrounds, creating a certain empathy in the 
sentence. Note, for instance, the sentencing memorandum filed on behalf of a client who 
had committed an egregious income tax violation: 
 
In short, the court must pass sentence upon  a man with an unblemished record, whose 
character is one of the highest and whose achievements have been truly outstanding. It is 
submitted that nothing in this record suggests that [the defendant] needs prison 
rehabilitation or that he is ever likely again to break the law. In considering only this man 
as a human being, it is submitted that a prison sentence is unwarranted. The record for 
total good during a life span of 44 years weig hs heavily against the isolated transgression of 
the evasions of taxes. 1  
 
Pre-trial Diversion 
While not truly a sentence since it is not the consequence of a trial or a plea, diversion is 
often used at the local level for offenders who seem suited to what it has to offer. Under its 
terms, selected individuals will be placed into some form of treatment program after they 
have been arrested but before further proceedings. If it is assumed, for instance, that their 
troubles with the criminal law were fundamentally related to alcoholism, they may be 
ordered to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings a certain number of times each week for 
a specified period. Other offenders, particularly  juveniles, might be diverted to different 
kinds of counseling programs or placed in a remedial education group. Referrals to 
employment services might also be mandated. 
 
In theory, a person can be placed in a pre-trial diversion program almost indefinitely, though 
most judges will stipulate a time period. If the person successfully completes the program, a 
criminal record can be avoided. If the accused person fails in the diversion program, usually 
by nonparticipation, he can be tried for the crime that had earlier been charged against him. 
In practice, some judges demonstrate seemingly endless patience with such offenders, since 
they had originally determined that, given the situation, they did not want to imprison the 
alleged offender. 
 
Probation 
Many laypersons confuse probation  with parole. Parole refers to the status of an offender after he 
has been released from prison or jail and is placed under supervision in the community. 
                                                 
1Ibid., p. 222. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Probation typically is a sentence imposed prior to (and instead of) incarceration. Some judges, 
however, favor what is called “shock probation.” They insist that offenders serve a brief 
time—perhaps only a week—in a penal institution in order to get a taste of what can be in 
store for them if they do not adhere to the law and to the probation conditions that are 
imposed upon them.  
 
Probation laws vary from state to state, but the offender typically is placed under the control 
and guidance of a probation officer, who is to see to it that the conditions that are 
established are met. In practice, probation officers tend to be seriously overworked and 
usually provide only minimal supervision of their charges. Most of their contact with the 
probationer may be only by way of telephone calls to the person and the person’s employer. 
Besides, probation officers are expected both to counsel and to control their roster of 
probations—roles that often are incompatible. Few probationers, for instance, will frankly 
discuss personal problems with a probation officer when they are aware that he can use what 
he learns as a basis for sending them to prison. 
 
Most probation agencies are part of the state bu reaucracy, though in larger areas they may be 
operated by the county. About 30 states combine the administration of probation and parole 
in a single agency.  
 
After a person is convicted of a crime, the probation officer is charged with investigating his 
background in order to provide information that will be helpful to the judge in determining 
what punishment to impose. The judge almost invariably will follow the recommendation of 
the probation officer, though some judges, valuing their independence, insist on reports 
without any recommended disposition. Nonetheless, probation officers soon learn what 
matters influence particular judges. If they observe, for instance, that a judge will invariably be 
lenient with an offender who attends church regularly, they will highlight that element if it is 
their own judgment that the defendant deserves a break. They also can pinpoint items that 
they know will influence a given judge to impose a harsher sentence. 
 
Probation implies a contract between the offender and the criminal justice system. Most 
probation rules require that the offender adhere to some or all of the following conditions: 
• Maintain steady employment. 
• Make restitution to the victim for losses or damages. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.305  
• Cooperate with the probation officer. This involves, among other matters, showing up 
for appointments, notifying the officer of change of address, intention to marry, a new 
job, or similar developments. 
• Meet family responsibilities. 
• Obey all laws. Many jurisdictions will incar cerate a probationer as a violator if they 
believe that he has committed another offense. They revoke his probation status, and 
thereby avoid the difficulties of a court proceeding. The probationer can fight this 
disposition and request a hearing, but few are likely to do so successfully. 
 
Rules specifically tailored to the particular offender also might be imposed. Probationers can 
be ordered to report for urinalysis or other forms of drug testing on a regular basis, or they 
can be forbidden to drive or to go to places where alcoholic beverages are served. Until 
relatively recently, most jurisdictions forbade probationers from associating with people who 
had a criminal record. But these are often the only friends a probationer might have, and the 
rule has come to be regarded by many criminal justice personnel as unreasonable and 
unlikely to be obeyed. For probation officers, the rule often affords a basis to revoke the 
freedom of an offender when they believe that he is continuing to violate the law, but they 
are unable to prove this.  
 
Sentences of probation are for a fixed period of time, with the length generally determined 
by statute and in terms of the seriousness of the offense. Violent offenders often are not 
allowed by law to be put on probation.  
 
There have been a number of innovative probation tactics, including house arrests and 
electronic monitoring.2 Under electronic monitoring, the probationer wears equipment that 
allows the probation officer to establish his whereabouts at any time. House arrest usually 
involves confinement to the place where the person lives, typically with an exception made 
for working outside at a job. 
 
Opponents of electronic monitoring see it as a “Big Brother” tactic that reminds them of the 
totalitarian regime depicted by George Orwell in his novel 1984. They also find house arrest 
too similar to the kinds of tactics typically used in some foreign countries to deal with 
“political” criminals. 
                                                 
2See Richard A. Ball, C. Ronald Huff, and J. Robert Lilly, House Arrest and Correctional Policy: Doing Time at 
Home. (Newbury Park, CA:  Sage, 1988). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Given overcrowding problems in prisons, the lower cost of keeping such people on the streets 
offers an attractive alternative; however, there is always the risk that the offender might 
commit a serious crime, thereby eliciting severe public criticism of the judicial and probation 
authorities. A desire to protect their reputation is a major consideration in decisions to impose 
a prison term on a person who arguably could do quite well in a controlled community setting. 
 
White-collar crime offenders are usually regarded as prime candidates for probation. They 
are highly unlikely to reoffend, usually have families to support, and generally express 
remorse and say that they will never again fall into errant habits. Of course, they typically 
make a fine appearance in court: well dressed, well spoken, courteous, and contrite.  
 
White-collar offenders tend to be older and, if imprisoned, might find the atmosphere 
intolerable, though there are a number of federal prisons—scornfully called “country clubs” 
by outsiders—where the population is largely ma de up of “tame” white-collar offenders.  
 
White-collar offenders also will receive lighter sentences if they cooperate with the 
authorities and bear witness against co-conspirators. In one study, it was found that more 
than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with a single offense compared to 
30 percent of uncooperative defendants. White-collar offenders also are more readily granted 
bail: just one person in eight spends any time incarcerated before trial, and for the generally 
high-status offenders, the figure is fewer than one in twenty. In a comparison group of 
“common criminals,” at least one-third spent time in jail before their trial. 3  
 
In early 2010, the SEC announced its initiative to encourage individual and company 
cooperation in investigations by offering Cooperation Agreements, Deferred Prosecution 
Agreements, and Non-Prosecution Agreements. See the updated SEC Enforcement Manual 
at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/enforce/enforcementmanual.pdf  for further details of the 
tools available to the SEC for encouraging cooperation. 
 
Shaming 
Criminologists lately have been paying a great deal of attention to the concept of reintegrative 
shaming  as a punishment that might deter an offender from further wrongdoing. Put forward 
by an Australian, John Braithwaite, (who was the first winner of the Association of Certified 
                                                 
3David Weisburd, Stanton Wheeler, Elin Waring, and Nancy Bode, Crimes of the Middle Classes: White-Collar 
Offenders in the Federal Courts (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.307  
Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award), shaming invo lves two subtle and delicate practices. First, 
pressure is put on the offender by those closest to him, those he respects, and, sometimes, 
those he has victimized to acknowledge that what he did is wrong and to feel truly contrite 
about his deed. Second, the offender is reassured that those important to him continue to 
regard him with affection and welcome him, as a reformed person, back into the fold. 
 
Critics believe that Braithwaite’s ideas, mode led on Chinese and Japanese customs, might in 
theory be extremely effective, but that in cynical societies, such as the United States, they are 
not very likely to have much impact on hardened lawbreakers. 
 
In America, shaming has tended to take a much harsher approach. The tactic was made 
famous by Nathaniel Hawthorne in The Scarlet Letter, in which an adulterer is forced to wear 
the letter “A” sewn into her cloak. Branding on the hand or forehead was used in 
seventeenth century England for thieves and other offenders who were spared the more 
common punishment of death by hanging.  
 
Today, a form of branding characterizes responses to certain criminal offenses. Some states 
require that when an offender is released from prison after serving time for sexual assault on 
a child, members of the community where he will live must be notified of his presence 
among them. Jurisdictions increasingly are resorting to such “shaming” approaches to isolate 
offenders and warn those they presumably might harm. In l996, as a condition of probation, 
a farmer in Pittsfield, Illinois, was required to place a large sign at the entrance of his 
driveway reading: “Warning: A Violent Felon Li ves Here. Travel at Your Own Risk.” The 
offender had hit another farmer in the face with a fuel pump.  
 
Similarly, individuals convicted of drunk driving sometimes have to put special license plates 
on their cars. Shoplifters may be required to take out advertisements in their local papers 
showing their pictures and announcing their offense. 
 
Opponents of such penalties point out that there is little scientific evidence of their value 
and that their legal justification is arguable. They say that the aim of justice is not vengeance 
and humiliation, but to restore what was destroyed and to prevent an illegal act from 
recurring. They do not believe that the shaming approach that is becoming fashionable in 
the United States achieves such ends. 
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


sentenc option
there ar a varieti of sanction avail to the judg and when thei ar charg with
impos sentenc the juri as well among other there is pretrial divers probat
and incapacit or incarcer if the sentenc is imprison it mai be made under
rule that dictat a determin sentenc such as five year or an indetermin sentenc
such as five to ten year there ar some offens where the sentenc is mandatori and
dictat by a set of guidelin that typic allow for a decreas or increas of the stipul
amount of time to be serv if certain other circumst ar present for instanc whether
the offend wa arm
sentenc of whitecollar offend is often complic by the fact that while their
behavior mai have been notabl harm thi most like will be their first crimin offens
thei also typic come to court with an unblemish record of social accomplish
church particip seemingli strong famili ti and an arrai of civil achiev these
kind of credenti work in offend favor when it come time to impos a sentenc upon
them studi of whitecollar crime also point out that judg and defend in such case
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4303
often share similar social and educ background creat a certain empathi in the
sentenc note for instanc the sentenc memorandum file on behalf of a client who
had commit an egregi incom tax violat
in short the court must pass sentenc upon a man with an unblemish record whose
charact is on of the highest and whose achiev have been truli outstand it is
submit that noth in thi record suggest that the defend need prison
rehabilit or that he is ever like again to break the law in consid onli thi man
as a human be it is submit that a prison sentenc is unwarr the record for
total good dure a life span of 44 year weig hs heavili against the isol transgress of
the evas of tax 1
pretrial divers
while not truli a sentenc sinc it is not the consequ of a trial or a plea divers is
often us at the local level for offend who seem suit to what it ha to offer under it
term select individu will be place into some form of treatment program after thei
have been arrest but befor further proceed if it is assum for instanc that their
troubl with the crimin law were fundament relat to alcohol thei mai be
order to attend alcohol anonym meet a certain number of time each week for
a specifi period other offend particularli juvenil might be divert to differ
kind of counsel program or place in a remedi educ group referr to
employ servic might also be mandat
in theori a person can be place in a pretrial divers program almost indefinit though
most judg will stipul a time period if the person successfulli complet the program a
crimin record can be avoid if the accus person fail in the divers program usual
by nonparticip he can be tri for the crime that had earlier been charg against him
in practic some judg demonstr seemingli endless patienc with such offend sinc
thei had origin determin that given the situat thei did not want to imprison the
alleg offend
probat
mani layperson confus probat with parol parol refer to the statu of an offend after he
ha been releas from prison or jail and is place under supervis in the commun
1ibid p 222
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4304 2011 fraud examin manual
probat typic is a sentenc impos prior to and instead of incarcer some judg
howev favor what is call shock probat thei insist that offend serv a brief
timeperhap onli a weekin a penal institut in order to get a tast of what can be in
store for them if thei do not adher to the law and to the probat condit that ar
impos upon them
probat law vari from state to state but the offend typic is place under the control
and guidanc of a probat offic who is to see to it that the condit that ar
establish ar met in practic probat offic tend to be serious overwork and
usual provid onli minim supervis of their charg most of their contact with the
probation mai be onli by wai of telephon call to the person and the person employ
besid probat offic ar expect both to counsel and to control their roster of
probationsrol that often ar incompat few probation for instanc will frankli
discuss person problem with a probat offic when thei ar awar that he can us what
he learn as a basi for send them to prison
most probat agenc ar part of the state bu reaucraci though in larger area thei mai be
oper by the counti about 30 state combin the administr of probat and parol
in a singl agenc
after a person is convict of a crime the probat offic is charg with investig hi
background in order to provid inform that will be help to the judg in determin
what punish to impos the judg almost invari will follow the recommend of
the probat offic though some judg valu their independ insist on report
without ani recommend disposit nonetheless probat offic soon learn what
matter influenc particular judg if thei observ for instanc that a judg will invari be
lenient with an offend who attend church regularli thei will highlight that element if it is
their own judgment that the defend deserv a break thei also can pinpoint item that
thei know will influenc a given judg to impos a harsher sentenc
probat impli a contract between the offend and the crimin justic system most
probat rule requir that the offend adher to some or all of the follow condit
maintain steadi employ
make restitut to the victim for loss or damag
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4305
cooper with the probat offic thi involv among other matter show up
for appoint notifi the offic of chang of address intent to marri a new
job or similar develop
meet famili respons
obei all law mani jurisdict will incar cerat a probation as a violat if thei
believ that he ha commit anoth offens thei revok hi probat statu and
therebi avoid the difficulti of a court proceed the probation can fight thi
disposit and request a hear but few ar like to do so successfulli
rule specif tailor to the particular offend also might be impos probation can
be order to report for urinalysi or other form of drug test on a regular basi or thei
can be forbidden to drive or to go to place where alcohol beverag ar serv until
rel recent most jurisdict forbad probation from associ with peopl who
had a crimin record but these ar often the onli friend a probation might have and the
rule ha come to be regard by mani crimin justic personnel as unreason and
unlik to be obei for probat offic the rule often afford a basi to revok the
freedom of an offend when thei believ that he is continu to violat the law but thei
ar unabl to prove thi
sentenc of probat ar for a fix period of time with the length gener determin
by statut and in term of the serious of the offens violent offend often ar not
allow by law to be put on probat
there have been a number of innov probat tactic includ hous arrest and
electron monitoring2 under electron monitor the probation wear equip that
allow the probat offic to establish hi whereabout at ani time hous arrest usual
involv confin to the place where the person live typic with an except made
for work outsid at a job
oppon of electron monitor see it as a big brother tactic that remind them of the
totalitarian regim depict by georg orwel in hi novel 1984 thei also find hous arrest
too similar to the kind of tactic typic us in some foreign countri to deal with
polit crimin
2see richard a ball c ronald huff and j robert lilli hous arrest and correct polici do time at
home newburi park ca sage 1988
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4306 2011 fraud examin manual
given overcrowd problem in prison the lower cost of keep such peopl on the street
offer an attract altern howev there is alwai the risk that the offend might
commit a seriou crime therebi elicit sever public critic of the judici and probat
author a desir to protect their reput is a major consider in decis to impos
a prison term on a person who arguabl could do quit well in a control commun set
whitecollar crime offend ar usual regard as prime candid for probat thei
ar highli unlik to reoffend usual have famili to support and gener express
remors and sai that thei will never again fall into errant habit of cours thei typic
make a fine appear in court well dress well spoken courteou and contrit
whitecollar offend tend to be older and if imprison might find the atmospher
intoler though there ar a number of feder prisonsscornfulli call countri club
by outsiderswher the popul is larg ma de up of tame whitecollar offend
whitecollar offend also will receiv lighter sentenc if thei cooper with the
author and bear wit against coconspir in on studi it wa found that more
than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with a singl offens compar to
30 percent of uncoop defend whitecollar offend also ar more readili grant
bail just on person in eight spend ani time incarcer befor trial and for the gener
highstatu offend the figur is fewer than on in twenti in a comparison group of
common crimin at least onethird spent time in jail befor their trial 3
in earli 2010 the sec announc it initi to encourag individu and compani
cooper in investig by offer cooper agreement defer prosecut
agreement and nonprosecut agreement see the updat sec enforc manual
at httpwwwsecgovdivisionsenforceenforcementmanualpdf for further detail of the
tool avail to the sec for encourag cooper
shame
criminologist late have been pai a great deal of attent to the concept of reintegr
shame as a punish that might deter an offend from further wrongdo put forward
by an australian john braithwait who wa the first winner of the associ of certifi
3david weisburd stanton wheeler elin ware and nanci bode crime of the middl class whitecollar
offend in the feder court new haven yale univers press 1991
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4307
fraud examin cressei award shame invo lve two subtl and delic practic first
pressur is put on the offend by those closest to him those he respect and sometim
those he ha victim to acknowledg that what he did is wrong and to feel truli contrit
about hi deed second the offend is reassur that those import to him continu to
regard him with affect and welcom him as a reform person back into the fold
critic believ that braithwait idea mode led on chines and japanes custom might in
theori be extrem effect but that in cynic societi such as the unit state thei ar
not veri like to have much impact on harden lawbreak
in america shame ha tend to take a much harsher approach the tactic wa made
famou by nathaniel hawthorn in the scarlet letter in which an adulter is forc to wear
the letter a sewn into her cloak brand on the hand or forehead wa us in
seventeenth centuri england for thiev and other offend who were spare the more
common punish of death by hang
todai a form of brand character respons to certain crimin offens some state
requir that when an offend is releas from prison after serv time for sexual assault on
a child member of the commun where he will live must be notifi of hi presenc
among them jurisdict increasingli ar resort to such shame approach to isol
offend and warn those thei presum might harm in l996 as a condit of probat
a farmer in pittsfield illinoi wa requir to place a larg sign at the entranc of hi
drivewai read warn a violent felon li ve here travel at your own risk the
offend had hit anoth farmer in the face with a fuel pump
similarli individu convict of drunk drive sometim have to put special licens plate
on their car shoplift mai be requir to take out advertis in their local paper
show their pictur and announc their offens
oppon of such penalti point out that there is littl scientif evid of their valu
and that their legal justif is arguabl thei sai that the aim of justic is not vengeanc
and humili but to restor what wa destroi and to prevent an illeg act from
recur thei do not believ that the shame approach that is becom fashion in
the unit state achiev such end
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4308 2011 fraud examin manual
