2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Corrections


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Corrections 
Corrections  is one of those euphemistic words that increasingly are entering the language in 
order to soften the reality of a situation. Corrections  is the general term for the process of 
administering punishment following a plea or a conviction in regard to a criminal offense. It 
most typically refers to imprisonment. People serve time in prisons most generally for 
felonies, while jails house individuals convicted of misdemeanors or those awaiting trial who 
have been unable or are not permitted to raise bail to purchase some free time. Generally, 
sentences of a year or less are served in jail; those that are longer involve prison time. 
 
The term corrections  came into usage during a period in which the ruling philosophy was that 
confinement could reform a lawbreaker. Thus, prisons for young persons were rechristened 
as reformatories. The programs—at least in blueprint— focused on education, group therapy, 
skills training, and similar projects geared toward allowing a released inmate to live in a self-fulfilling 
manner after release. Nonetheless, the core of prison existence clearly was  
punitive and most observers regarded the “rehabilitative” programs as little more than 
window-dressing.  
 
Today, the prevailing philosophy undergirding imprisonment is labeled “just deserts”; that is, 
a person who has hurt others and undermined the well-being of society has “earned” 
through his behavior the consequence of deprivation of liberty and the concomitant 
characteristics of imprisonment. There is no need, just desert advocates believe, to coat 
imprisonment with cozy descriptors; it is treatment that an offender deserves because of his 
self-interested illegal behavior. 
 
Incapacitation  is the ruling rationale of the just deserts approach. By definition, imprisonment 
reduces crime by removing the opportunity for the offender to violate the law. There is, of 
course, a considerable level of criminal activity within a correctional institution that primarily 
involves drug-taking and assaults, including sexual assaults. But at least those outside the 
prison are protected from the depredations of those inside it. The key issue is that virtually 
all individuals who are incapacitated in an institutional setting (including those sentenced 
under the three-strikes laws) will someday be released. If they are pushed further into crime 
by their prison experience, it is possible that they might commit more serious offenses upon 
their release than they would have if they were given a lesser or lighter sentence. 
 
It is sometimes argued that white-collar criminals need not be imprisoned since their 
violations most often are tied to the occupational positions they occupy, and thus their 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.309  
patterns of offending can usually be eliminated by removing them from their business or 
professional positions. Doctors will no longer violate the laws governing medical benefit 
programs if their license to practice medicine is revoked, nor will inside traders have the 
chance to carry on their illegal activities if they are barred from trading either directly or by 
proxy. 
 
The difficulty with this reasoning is that incapacitation involves questions of equity; that is, 
whether all those who violate the law are treated similarly, with no favoritism to the wealthy 
and well placed. There also is the matter of general as opposed to specific deterrence. Specific 
deterrence  refers to keeping the individual who broke the law from doing so again. General 
deterrence  involves demonstrating to others the consequences of law-breaking so that they will 
not succumb to the temptation of doing so. Those with philosophical inclinations might 
seek to puzzle out the justice of punishing one person in order to teach other people a 
lesson, but the criminal justice system, not concerned with such esoteric matters, seeks to 
serve the ends of both specific and general deterrence in its response to law violators. 
 
Types of Sentences 
Sentences that involve incapacitation can take several forms. 
 
Determinate Sentences 
A determinate sentence is one of a fixed number of years, usually set by the legislature, to be 
served upon conviction of a certain offense. In so-called “flat” determinate sentences, the 
offender must serve the entire time in prison; say five years for a fraud violation. More often 
(though decreasingly so in many jurisdictions) the flat sentence can be reduced, usually by as 
much as one-third, for “good behavior.” This ca rrot is considered important by some prison 
administrators because it offers a reward for conforming to institutional rules beyond the 
avoidance of punishments meted out within the walls, such as solitary confinement.  
 
A variation on the determinate sentencing approach is for the legislature to set a maximum 
term for any given offense and to allow the sentencing judge to exercise discretion to impose 
a time period up to that maximum. Often an accused person will enter a guilty plea during a 
bargaining session with the prosecution which will stipulate that the person will be 
recommended for a sentence less than the maximum (an agreement which judges almost 
invariably endorse) or that the person will be allowed to plead to a lesser offense than the 
more serious one in order to ensure that the sentence will not exceed a certain amount  
of time. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Indeterminate Sentences 
Indeterminate sentences impose a range of time that can be served by the offender, say five to 
twenty years. This gap allows the correctional authorities to determine when to release the 
prisoner based upon his performance within the institution and an assessment of the 
likelihood that he will continue to pose a danger to the community. Once the most popular 
form of sentencing because it was believed that prison officials possessed the skill and 
wisdom to make accurate judgments about re-offending, indeterminate sentences have come 
into disrepute during the past decades. The objections largely have focused on the inequities 
involved—two people committing the same offense often served vastly different prison 
terms. In addition, prison authorities were deemed to use the indeterminate sentence unfairly 
to take revenge on people they did not like, as a punitive weapon rather than as a  
predictive device.4 
 
Mandatory Sentences and Three-Strikes Law 
Legislatures began adopting mandatory sentences for crimes out of dissatisfaction with what 
they regarded as too-soft judges. The move has been led by the work of the U.S. Sentencing 
Commission. A typical mandatory sentence will disallow parole in the case of certain violent 
crimes or repeat offenses. Similarly, judges will not be permitted to place certain kinds of 
offenders on probation or to suspend their sentence. Most judges, of course, regard this 
inroad against their discretionary powers and autonomy unfavorably. 
 
In one of its more controversial actions, the U.S. Sentencing Commission in November l991 
established rules for sentencing corporations for diverse white-collar offenses. The purpose 
of the rules was to “provide just punishment, adequate deterrence, and incentives for 
organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and reporting 
criminal conduct.” The Commission’s rules reflect the following principles: First, the Court 
must, whenever practicable, order the organization to remedy any harm caused by the 
offenses. The resources expended to remedy the harm should not be viewed as punishment, 
but rather as a means of making victims whole for the harm caused. Second, if the 
organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose or primarily by criminal means, the 
fine should be set sufficiently high to divest the organization of all of its assets. Third, the 
fine range for any organization should be based upon the seriousness of the offense and the 
culpability of the organization. The seriousness of the offense generally will be reflected by 
                                                 
4See further James M. Byrne, Arthur J. Lurigio, and Joan Petersilia, eds., Smart Sentencing: The Emergence of 
Indeterminate Sentences. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1992) 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.311  
the highest of (a) the monetary gain, (b) the monetary loss, or (c) the amount noted in a 
guideline offense fine table. Culpability will generally be determined by the steps taken by the 
organization prior to the offense to prevent and detect criminal conduct, the level and extent 
of involvement in or tolerance of the offense by certain personnel, and the organization’s 
actions since an offense has been committed. 
 
The sentence schedule permits a court to place conditions on the way a business is run if the 
court believes that these changes are important to prevent further offending. Establishing 
more effective accounting procedures, hiring a waste control specialist, or expanding the 
board of directors beyond a group of intimates can be some of the conditions placed upon a 
corporation. On the other hand, if a company has established an internal regimen that seeks 
to control illegal actions, it can receive credit from the court for this in regard to reduction of 
a fine or other stipulated penalties. The sentencing guidelines provide, however, that a 
corporation generally is not eligible for a fine mitigation if the crime was committed by a 
more senior employee with managerial authority.5  
 
Prisons 
William Penn is widely credited with beginning the practice of imprisonment in the United 
States. In England in Penn’s time, capital puni shment was the usual response to most crime, 
with more than 250 designated offenses carrying that penalty. Some mitigation had been 
introduced by the practice of transportation, whereby selected offenders were dispatched to 
the American colonies and, after America gained its freedom from British rule, to Australia. 
 
Of the more than 1,800 prisons in the United States today, 372 are classified as maximum 
security, 480 as medium security, and 969 as minimum security. Since prison construction 
has not kept up with prison populations, overcrowding is a serious problem, and a large 
number of states are under federal court orders to reduce overcrowding and otherwise 
improve prison conditions. 
 
More than four-fifths of prison inmates have a record of prior criminal offenses. More than 
half are incarcerated for violent behavior, and nearly one in five committed the offense to 
obtain money for drugs. Almost nine out of ten jail inmates are adult males. Prior to 
incarceration, the median income of inmates was lower than $10,000 a year. 
                                                 
5For a thorough review of the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Guidelines for organizational offenses see  
Henry J. Amoroso, “Organizational Ethos and Corporate Criminal Liability,” Campbell Law Review, 17  
(1995): 47–70. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Today, the growth in prison populations has been particularly pronounced. In l985, there 
were 313 incarcerated people in the United States per every 100,000 people. That figure rose 
to 509 inmates per 100,000 persons in 2008. The growth largely was fueled by the 
imprisonment of drug offenders. At the end of June 2008, there were 2,310,984 people in 
federal and state prisons and local jails. This represents a rise of 0.8 percent from the end of 
2007, less than the average annual growth of 2.4 percent from 2000–2007.  
 
The total number of people in jail and prisons in the United States has tripled over the last 
several decades as politicians have pressed for tougher sentencing laws and have built more 
prisons to seek to assuage public fears about violent crime. 
 
Critics of prisons continue to argue that the rights of prisoners are too liberal. Prisoners have 
used the courts to seek to obtain greater privileges in regard to religion and speech, medical 
care, vocational and educational training, due process, and general living conditions.  
 
At the same time, prisons have become increasingly violent, particularly as ethnic and racial 
groups clash. Interethnic and racial clashes have led to suggestions that prisoners ought to be 
segregated along racial and ethnic lines to reduce outbreaks of violence.  
 
Federal prisons, which tend to be more richly funded, are regarded as superior to virtually all 
state institutions, and it is in them that most incarcerated white-collar offenders will do  
their time. 
 
There are five different security levels in order to confine offenders in an appropriate 
manner. They are: minimum security, low security, medium security, high security,  
and administrative. 
 
Rehabilitation 
Intense debate in the area of corrections has centered about the question of whether prison 
and other programs can rehabilitate those exposed to them. A famous study by Robert 
Martinson reviewed more than 200 carefully designed research studies of diverse kinds of 
treatment programs for offenders and concluded that none of them showed much, if any, 
ability to turn persons away from a life of crime.6 More recently, some scholars now 
maintain that Martinson’s research was flawed and that his conclusion was inaccurate. They 
                                                 
6Robert Martinson, “What Works? — Questions and Answers About Prison Reform,” Public Interest, 35 
(1974):22-54. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.313  
stress in particular that the error has been to look for improvement in all those who undergo 
one or another kind of treatment regimen; instead, the effort should be to determine what 
works for what kinds of people and to concentrate on these conclusions when formulating 
treatment approaches.7  
 
Certainly, some white-collar offenders have used the incarceration experience to redesign 
their lives, in a manner very much for the better. Charles W. Colson, a onetime special 
assistant to President Nixon, was described by Herbert Klein, Nixon’s intimate friend, as 
“one of the meanest people I ever knew.” Caught up in the Watergate scandal, Colson 
negotiated a guilty plea to one count of obstruction of justice in regard to his involvement in 
the burglary of the office of Daniel Ellsberg in an effort to defame Ellsberg, who had 
released the Pentagon Papers, which showed the falsity of government claims about the 
progress of the Vietnam War. Colson received a one-to-three year prison sentence and was 
fined $5,000. 
 
During his time as an inmate at the Max well federal prison, Colson formed the Prison 
Fellowship, which sought to change the lives of convicts through a combination of 
“practical assistance and relentless evangelism.” 8 So successful was Colson that two decades 
after his release he was awarded the Templeton Prize for Progress in Religion, a prize that 
carried a stipend of more than $l million. “Twenty years later I see how God has used my 
life,” Colson noted when receiving the award. “Sometimes the greatest adversities turn out 
to be the greatest blessings.” 
 
Not all white-collar offenders demonstrate so extraordinary a turnabout, but cynics are wont 
to say that if one of the problems involved in maintaining control in America’s turbulent 
prison system has its basis in the lifestyles of many offenders, a “better class of prisoners”— 
that is, more white-collar offenders—mi ght help solve part of that problem. 
 
Jails 
There almost invariably is little in the way of treatment available in jails; they simply 
warehouse prisoners. Jails originated in France in the l600s, and through the centuries, they 
                                                 
7Francis T. Cullen and Paul Gendreau, “The Effectiveness of Correctional Treatment: Reconsidered the 
‘Nothing Works’ Debate,” in Lynne Goodstein and Doris Layton MacKenzie, eds., The American Prison: 
Issues in Research and Policy (New York: Plenum Press, 1989), pp. 24–30. 
8T. Carlson, “Deliver Us From Evil:  Prison Fellowship’s Saving Gra ce,” Policy Review, 62 (1992):72–22; see 
Charles W. Colson, Born Again (Old Tappan, NJ:  Chosen Books, 1976) Colson, Life Sentence (Minneapolis:  
World Wide, 1979). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
have been regarded as hellholes of pestilence and cruelty. In medieval England, a jail 
sentence was regarded as a sentence to death since conditions were so abominable. Today, 
more than 8 million people are placed in jails each year, some for several stays. The great 
majority are poorly educated, unemployed, impoverished, and drug ridden. 
 
Community-Based Corrections 
To ease overcrowding, community-based correctional facilities have become commonplace. 
While some people might be sentenced directly to such programs, they typically house 
individuals who have completed time inside institutional walls. Community-based programs 
emphasize the use of neighborhood residential re-entry centers (also known as halfway 
houses), comprehensive sanction centers, and home confinement.  
 
Parole  
Parole (derived from the French and meaning “word,” as in “word of honor”) is the planned 
release and community supervision of offenders before the expiration of their sentence. 
Under most state laws, an offender is eligible for parole after serving one-third of his 
sentence. Parole decisions usually are made by a board or a commission, based on its 
members’ conclusion regarding whether the offe nder will remain at liberty without violating 
the law. There is pressure on parole board members to be notably conservative in their 
actions, because any repetition of an offense by someone they release, particularly if the 
offense is heinous, will trigger community outrage against the board. On the other hand, 
overcrowded prison conditions dictate early release to make room for newcomers. 
 
Parole is considered an act of grace, and once on parole, the inmate is supposed to be  
closely supervised by a parole officer, though this rarely happens because of extraordinarily 
heavy caseloads.  
 
Pardons 
A person may apply for a pardon that, if granted, releases him from further punishment and 
restores the civil rights that are forfeited upon conviction for a crime, including the right to 
vote, to serve on a jury, or to hold public office. 
 
There are two types of pardons — (l) full and absolute and (2) conditional. Full and absolute 
pardons usually are granted only after conviction and upon a presumptive showing that the 
offender was actually innocent. The full and absolute pardon that Richard Nixon received 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.315  
from President Gerald Ford before possible criminal proceedings had begun was a rare 
exception to this rule. 
 
A conditional pardon implies guilt, and for this reason, may be rejected by the person to 
whom it is offered. The grant of a pardon or other clemency is the prerogative of the 
executive branch (the president or state governors) and may not be compelled by the 
petitioner or by the judiciary. 
 
 



:


correct
correct is on of those euphemist word that increasingli ar enter the languag in
order to soften the realiti of a situat correct is the gener term for the process of
administ punish follow a plea or a convict in regard to a crimin offens it
most typic refer to imprison peopl serv time in prison most gener for
feloni while jail hous individu convict of misdemeanor or those await trial who
have been unabl or ar not permit to rais bail to purchas some free time gener
sentenc of a year or less ar serv in jail those that ar longer involv prison time
the term correct came into usag dure a period in which the rule philosophi wa that
confin could reform a lawbreak thu prison for young person were rechristen
as reformatori the programsat least in blueprint focus on educ group therapi
skill train and similar project gear toward allow a releas inmat to live in a selffulfil
manner after releas nonetheless the core of prison exist clearli wa
punit and most observ regard the rehabilit program as littl more than
windowdress
todai the prevail philosophi undergird imprison is label just desert that is
a person who ha hurt other and undermin the wellb of societi ha earn
through hi behavior the consequ of depriv of liberti and the concomit
characterist of imprison there is no need just desert advoc believ to coat
imprison with cozi descriptor it is treatment that an offend deserv becaus of hi
selfinterest illeg behavior
incapacit is the rule rational of the just desert approach by definit imprison
reduc crime by remov the opportun for the offend to violat the law there is of
cours a consider level of crimin activ within a correct institut that primarili
involv drugtak and assault includ sexual assault but at least those outsid the
prison ar protect from the depred of those insid it the kei issu is that virtual
all individu who ar incapacit in an institut set includ those sentenc
under the threestrik law will somedai be releas if thei ar push further into crime
by their prison experi it is possibl that thei might commit more seriou offens upon
their releas than thei would have if thei were given a lesser or lighter sentenc
it is sometim argu that whitecollar crimin need not be imprison sinc their
violat most often ar ti to the occup posit thei occupi and thu their
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4309
pattern of offend can usual be elimin by remov them from their busi or
profession posit doctor will no longer violat the law govern medic benefit
program if their licens to practic medicin is revok nor will insid trader have the
chanc to carri on their illeg activ if thei ar bar from trade either directli or by
proxi
the difficulti with thi reason is that incapacit involv question of equiti that is
whether all those who violat the law ar treat similarli with no favorit to the wealthi
and well place there also is the matter of gener as oppos to specif deterr specif
deterr refer to keep the individu who broke the law from do so again gener
deterr involv demonstr to other the consequ of lawbreak so that thei will
not succumb to the temptat of do so those with philosoph inclin might
seek to puzzl out the justic of punish on person in order to teach other peopl a
lesson but the crimin justic system not concern with such esoter matter seek to
serv the end of both specif and gener deterr in it respons to law violat
type of sentenc
sentenc that involv incapacit can take sever form
determin sentenc
a determin sentenc is on of a fix number of year usual set by the legislatur to be
serv upon convict of a certain offens in socal flat determin sentenc the
offend must serv the entir time in prison sai five year for a fraud violat more often
though decreasingli so in mani jurisdict the flat sentenc can be reduc usual by as
much as onethird for good behavior thi ca rrot is consid import by some prison
administr becaus it offer a reward for conform to institut rule beyond the
avoid of punish mete out within the wall such as solitari confin
a variat on the determin sentenc approach is for the legislatur to set a maximum
term for ani given offens and to allow the sentenc judg to exercis discret to impos
a time period up to that maximum often an accus person will enter a guilti plea dure a
bargain session with the prosecut which will stipul that the person will be
recommend for a sentenc less than the maximum an agreement which judg almost
invari endors or that the person will be allow to plead to a lesser offens than the
more seriou on in order to ensur that the sentenc will not exce a certain amount
of time
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4310 2011 fraud examin manual
indetermin sentenc
indetermin sentenc impos a rang of time that can be serv by the offend sai five to
twenti year thi gap allow the correct author to determin when to releas the
prison base upon hi perform within the institut and an assess of the
likelihood that he will continu to pose a danger to the commun onc the most popular
form of sentenc becaus it wa believ that prison offici possess the skill and
wisdom to make accur judgment about reoffend indetermin sentenc have come
into disreput dure the past decad the object larg have focus on the inequ
involvedtwo peopl commit the same offens often serv vastli differ prison
term in addit prison author were deem to us the indetermin sentenc unfairli
to take reveng on peopl thei did not like as a punit weapon rather than as a
predict device4
mandatori sentenc and threestrik law
legislatur began adopt mandatori sentenc for crime out of dissatisfact with what
thei regard as toosoft judg the move ha been led by the work of the us sentenc
commiss a typic mandatori sentenc will disallow parol in the case of certain violent
crime or repeat offens similarli judg will not be permit to place certain kind of
offend on probat or to suspend their sentenc most judg of cours regard thi
inroad against their discretionari power and autonomi unfavor
in on of it more controversi action the us sentenc commiss in novemb l991
establish rule for sentenc corpor for divers whitecollar offens the purpos
of the rule wa to provid just punish adequ deterr and incent for
organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and report
crimin conduct the commiss rule reflect the follow principl first the court
must whenev practic order the organ to remedi ani harm caus by the
offens the resourc expend to remedi the harm should not be view as punish
but rather as a mean of make victim whole for the harm caus second if the
organ oper primarili for a crimin purpos or primarili by crimin mean the
fine should be set suffici high to divest the organ of all of it asset third the
fine rang for ani organ should be base upon the serious of the offens and the
culpabl of the organ the serious of the offens gener will be reflect by
4see further jame m byrn arthur j lurigio and joan petersilia ed smart sentenc the emerg of
indetermin sentenc newburi park ca sage 1992
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4311
the highest of a the monetari gain b the monetari loss or c the amount note in a
guidelin offens fine tabl culpabl will gener be determin by the step taken by the
organ prior to the offens to prevent and detect crimin conduct the level and extent
of involv in or toler of the offens by certain personnel and the organ
action sinc an offens ha been commit
the sentenc schedul permit a court to place condit on the wai a busi is run if the
court believ that these chang ar import to prevent further offend establish
more effect account procedur hire a wast control specialist or expand the
board of director beyond a group of intim can be some of the condit place upon a
corpor on the other hand if a compani ha establish an intern regimen that seek
to control illeg action it can receiv credit from the court for thi in regard to reduct of
a fine or other stipul penalti the sentenc guidelin provid howev that a
corpor gener is not elig for a fine mitig if the crime wa commit by a
more senior employe with manageri authority5
prison
william penn is wide credit with begin the practic of imprison in the unit
state in england in penn time capit puni shment wa the usual respons to most crime
with more than 250 design offens carri that penalti some mitig had been
introduc by the practic of transport wherebi select offend were dispatch to
the american coloni and after america gain it freedom from british rule to australia
of the more than 1800 prison in the unit state todai 372 ar classifi as maximum
secur 480 as medium secur and 969 as minimum secur sinc prison construct
ha not kept up with prison popul overcrowd is a seriou problem and a larg
number of state ar under feder court order to reduc overcrowd and otherwis
improv prison condit
more than fourfifth of prison inmat have a record of prior crimin offens more than
half ar incarcer for violent behavior and nearli on in five commit the offens to
obtain monei for drug almost nine out of ten jail inmat ar adult male prior to
incarcer the median incom of inmat wa lower than 10000 a year
5for a thorough review of the us sentenc commiss guidelin for organiz offens see
henri j amoroso organiz etho and corpor crimin liabil campbel law review 17
1995 4770
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4312 2011 fraud examin manual
todai the growth in prison popul ha been particularli pronounc in l985 there
were 313 incarcer peopl in the unit state per everi 100000 peopl that figur rose
to 509 inmat per 100000 person in 2008 the growth larg wa fuel by the
imprison of drug offend at the end of june 2008 there were 2310984 peopl in
feder and state prison and local jail thi repres a rise of 08 percent from the end of
2007 less than the averag annual growth of 24 percent from 20002007
the total number of peopl in jail and prison in the unit state ha tripl over the last
sever decad as politician have press for tougher sentenc law and have built more
prison to seek to assuag public fear about violent crime
critic of prison continu to argu that the right of prison ar too liber prison have
us the court to seek to obtain greater privileg in regard to religion and speech medic
care vocat and educ train due process and gener live condit
at the same time prison have becom increasingli violent particularli as ethnic and racial
group clash interethn and racial clash have led to suggest that prison ought to be
segreg along racial and ethnic line to reduc outbreak of violenc
feder prison which tend to be more richli fund ar regard as superior to virtual all
state institut and it is in them that most incarcer whitecollar offend will do
their time
there ar five differ secur level in order to confin offend in an appropri
manner thei ar minimum secur low secur medium secur high secur
and administr
rehabilit
intens debat in the area of correct ha center about the question of whether prison
and other program can rehabilit those expos to them a famou studi by robert
martinson review more than 200 carefulli design research studi of divers kind of
treatment program for offend and conclud that none of them show much if ani
abil to turn person awai from a life of crime6 more recent some scholar now
maintain that martinson research wa flaw and that hi conclus wa inaccur thei
6robert martinson what work question and answer about prison reform public interest 35
19742254
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4313
stress in particular that the error ha been to look for improv in all those who undergo
on or anoth kind of treatment regimen instead the effort should be to determin what
work for what kind of peopl and to concentr on these conclus when formul
treatment approaches7
certainli some whitecollar offend have us the incarcer experi to redesign
their live in a manner veri much for the better charl w colson a onetim special
assist to presid nixon wa describ by herbert klein nixon intim friend as
on of the meanest peopl i ever knew caught up in the waterg scandal colson
negoti a guilti plea to on count of obstruct of justic in regard to hi involv in
the burglari of the offic of daniel ellsberg in an effort to defam ellsberg who had
releas the pentagon paper which show the falsiti of govern claim about the
progress of the vietnam war colson receiv a onetothre year prison sentenc and wa
fine 5000
dure hi time as an inmat at the max well feder prison colson form the prison
fellowship which sought to chang the live of convict through a combin of
practic assist and relentless evangel 8 so success wa colson that two decad
after hi releas he wa award the templeton prize for progress in religion a prize that
carri a stipend of more than l million twenti year later i see how god ha us my
life colson note when receiv the award sometim the greatest advers turn out
to be the greatest bless
not all whitecollar offend demonstr so extraordinari a turnabout but cynic ar wont
to sai that if on of the problem involv in maintain control in america turbul
prison system ha it basi in the lifestyl of mani offend a better class of prison
that is more whitecollar offendersmi ght help solv part of that problem
jail
there almost invari is littl in the wai of treatment avail in jail thei simpli
warehous prison jail origin in franc in the l600 and through the centuri thei
7franci t cullen and paul gendreau the effect of correct treatment reconsid the
noth work debat in lynn goodstein and dori layton mackenzi ed the american prison
issu in research and polici new york plenum press 1989 pp 2430
8t carlson deliv us from evil prison fellowship save gra ce polici review 62 19927222 see
charl w colson born again old tappan nj chosen book 1976 colson life sentenc minneapoli
world wide 1979
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4314 2011 fraud examin manual
have been regard as hellhol of pestil and cruelti in mediev england a jail
sentenc wa regard as a sentenc to death sinc condit were so abomin todai
more than 8 million peopl ar place in jail each year some for sever stai the great
major ar poorli educ unemploi impoverish and drug ridden
communitybas correct
to eas overcrowd communitybas correct facil have becom commonplac
while some peopl might be sentenc directli to such program thei typic hous
individu who have complet time insid institut wall communitybas program
emphas the us of neighborhood residenti reentri center also known as halfwai
hous comprehens sanction center and home confin
parol
parol deriv from the french and mean word as in word of honor is the plan
releas and commun supervis of offend befor the expir of their sentenc
under most state law an offend is elig for parol after serv onethird of hi
sentenc parol decis usual ar made by a board or a commiss base on it
member conclus regard whether the off nder will remain at liberti without violat
the law there is pressur on parol board member to be notabl conserv in their
action becaus ani repetit of an offens by someon thei releas particularli if the
offens is heinou will trigger commun outrag against the board on the other hand
overcrowd prison condit dictat earli releas to make room for newcom
parol is consid an act of grace and onc on parol the inmat is suppos to be
close supervis by a parol offic though thi rare happen becaus of extraordinarili
heavi caseload
pardon
a person mai appli for a pardon that if grant releas him from further punish and
restor the civil right that ar forfeit upon convict for a crime includ the right to
vote to serv on a juri or to hold public offic
there ar two type of pardon l full and absolut and 2 condit full and absolut
pardon usual ar grant onli after convict and upon a presumpt show that the
offend wa actual innoc the full and absolut pardon that richard nixon receiv
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4315
from presid gerald ford befor possibl crimin proceed had begun wa a rare
except to thi rule
a condit pardon impli guilt and for thi reason mai be reject by the person to
whom it is offer the grant of a pardon or other clemenc is the prerog of the
execut branch the presid or state governor and mai not be compel by the
petition or by the judiciari
