2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Crime Statistics/Uniform Crime Reports


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Uniform Crime Reports 
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) compiles statistics on the extent of crime in the 
United States in a document called the Uniform Crime Report (UCR). The report is put 
together on the basis of information voluntarily submitted by more than l5,000 law 
enforcement departments. This includes virtually every significant public policing agency in 
the country. 
 
The UCR divides crimes into Part I and Part II offenses. Part I offenses are murder and 
non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, 
arson, and auto theft. While most people would agree that these categories appear to 
incorporate most serious criminal behavior, the somewhat arbitrary nature of the categories 
should not be overlooked. In regard to rape, for instance, the category also embraces 
attempted rape, and studies have shown that men may be arrested for attempted rape for 
behaviors no more ominous (at least in comparison with forcible rape) than patting a female 
stranger on the behind in a rather menacing way. The police charge a serious crime in order 
to more readily persuade the offender to plead to a lesser offense. 
  
The inclusion of arson on the list of major offenses illustrates that political concern enters 
into the compilations. It was added to the FBI Part I tables about a decade ago when 
legislators decided that the offense needed to be highlighted and mandated that the FBI 
upgrade it. 
 
Part II offenses include most other violations, though they omit traffic offenses and pay no 
heed to serious white-collar crime. When they do mention offenses that might fall into the 
white-collar category, often what they are tabulating as offenses includes crimes that might 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
otherwise not be considered white-collar. For example, for classification purposes, forgery  
includes the passing of bad checks by drug addicts without bank accounts. When you add in 
theft of services, welfare fraud, petty confidence games, and credit card fraud, you can 
account for virtually all of the crimes charged under possible white-collar crime headings. 
 
The UCR figures are based on what is called “offenses known to the police.” Data is also 
provided on arrests, though not on whether the case is resolved by a determination of guilt. 
Rates are reported per 100,000 persons, a matter which skews the crime picture in some 
jurisdictions. In Las Vegas, for instance, the crime rate is higher per capita than it reasonably 
ought to be because the figures pay no heed to the very large tourist influx. 
 



:


uniform crime report
the feder bureau of investig fbi compil statist on the extent of crime in the
unit state in a document call the uniform crime report ucr the report is put
togeth on the basi of inform voluntarili submit by more than l5000 law
enforc depart thi includ virtual everi signific public polic agenc in
the countri
the ucr divid crime into part i and part ii offens part i offens ar murder and
nonneglig manslaught forcibl rape robberi aggrav assault burglari larceni
arson and auto theft while most peopl would agre that these categori appear to
incorpor most seriou crimin behavior the somewhat arbitrari natur of the categori
should not be overlook in regard to rape for instanc the categori also embrac
attempt rape and studi have shown that men mai be arrest for attempt rape for
behavior no more omin at least in comparison with forcibl rape than pat a femal
stranger on the behind in a rather menac wai the polic charg a seriou crime in order
to more readili persuad the offend to plead to a lesser offens
the inclus of arson on the list of major offens illustr that polit concern enter
into the compil it wa ad to the fbi part i tabl about a decad ago when
legisl decid that the offens need to be highlight and mandat that the fbi
upgrad it
part ii offens includ most other violat though thei omit traffic offens and pai no
heed to seriou whitecollar crime when thei do mention offens that might fall into the
whitecollar categori often what thei ar tabul as offens includ crime that might
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4316 2011 fraud examin manual
otherwis not be consid whitecollar for exampl for classif purpos forgeri
includ the pass of bad check by drug addict without bank account when you add in
theft of servic welfar fraud petti confid game and credit card fraud you can
account for virtual all of the crime charg under possibl whitecollar crime head
the ucr figur ar base on what is call offens known to the polic data is also
provid on arrest though not on whether the case is resolv by a determin of guilt
rate ar report per 100000 person a matter which skew the crime pictur in some
jurisdict in la vega for instanc the crime rate is higher per capita than it reason
ought to be becaus the figur pai no heed to the veri larg tourist influx
