2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/The Warrant Requirement


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


The Warrant Requirement 
All searches and seizures must be reasonable. Whether it is reasonable to conduct a search 
and whether the activities were conducted in a reasonable manner is determined by the 
totality of the circumstances. A reasonable search is one carried out pursuant to a warrant 
(i.e., a court order that grants authorities the right to take a particular action) issued upon a 
showing of probable cause. Thus, in some circumstances, the Fourth Amendment requires 
that the government obtain a warrant before they conduct a search.  
 
Moreover, in Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), the Supreme Court held that the 
Fourth Amendment “protects people, not places” (meaning that its provisions extend 
beyond the property line of the citizen), that the amendment applies wherever there is a 
“reasonable expectation of privacy,” and that a search without a warrant is “per se  
unreasonable,” in the absence of exigent circumstances. Thus, the police normally need to 
obtain a warrant not only to search a house, but also to intercept calls from a public 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.418  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
telephone booth, or inspect the contents of a safe deposit box, or to otherwise intrude into 
matters that the courts would reasonably consider to be private. 
 
In Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), the Supreme Court ruled that all warrants must 
be issued by a judge or magistrate (the latter a federal judicial officer empowered to hear 
misdemeanor cases), explaining that “the point  of the Fourth Amendment … is not that it 
denies law enforcement the support of the usual inferences which reasonable men draw 
from evidence. Its protection consists in requiring that those inferences be drawn by a 
neutral and detached magistrate instead of being judged by the officer engaged in the often 
competitive enterprise of ferreting out crime.” 
 
Additionally, all warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That 
is, all warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” 
and they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. 
 
The “probable cause” requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the central restraint on the 
power of the police to search. Probable cause has been defined as those facts and 
circumstances sufficient to cause a person of reasonable caution to believe that a crime has 
been committed and that the accused committed it. It requires more than mere suspicion or 
hunch, but less than virtual certainty. “Reasonable grounds to believe” is probably as good a 
definition as any. 
 
Furthermore, all warrants must particularly describe the place to be searched or the person 
or things to be seized. The particularity requirement was intended to prevent prevents “the 
issuance of warrants on loose, vague or doubtful bases of facts,”  an abuse that outraged the 
constitutional drafters. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 US 344, 357 (1931). In 
today’s terms, the clause would prohibit a search warrant in a white-collar investigation or a 
subpoena that commanded the production of all the defendant’s books and records whether 
or not relevant to the investigation or trial. 
 
But even if a warrant is technically required, there are a number of recognized exceptions to 
the warrant requirement, principally: 
• Workplace searches by government employers 
• Searches incident to arrest 
• Searches of motor vehicles 
• Exigent or emergency circumstances, to prevent the destruction of evidence, or while in 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.419 
“hot pursuit” of a suspect 
• When the search is conducted pursuant to a valid, voluntary consent 
• When the evidence is in “plain view” 
• Border, customs, and prison searches 
 



:


the warrant requir
all search and seizur must be reason whether it is reason to conduct a search
and whether the activ were conduct in a reason manner is determin by the
total of the circumst a reason search is on carri out pursuant to a warrant
ie a court order that grant author the right to take a particular action issu upon a
show of probabl caus thu in some circumst the fourth amend requir
that the govern obtain a warrant befor thei conduct a search
moreov in katz v unit state 389 us 347 1967 the suprem court held that the
fourth amend protect peopl not place mean that it provis extend
beyond the properti line of the citizen that the amend appli wherev there is a
reason expect of privaci and that a search without a warrant is per se
unreason in the absenc of exig circumst thu the polic normal need to
obtain a warrant not onli to search a hous but also to intercept call from a public
individu right dure examin law
2418 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon booth or inspect the content of a safe deposit box or to otherwis intrud into
matter that the court would reason consid to be privat
in johnson v unit state 333 us 10 1948 the suprem court rule that all warrant must
be issu by a judg or magistr the latter a feder judici offic empow to hear
misdemeanor case explain that the point of the fourth amend
is not that it
deni law enforc the support of the usual infer which reason men draw
from evid it protect consist in requir that those infer be drawn by a
neutral and detach magistr instead of be judg by the offic engag in the often
competit enterpris of ferret out crime
addition all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that
is all warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus
and thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz
the probabl caus requir of the fourth amend is the central restraint on the
power of the polic to search probabl caus ha been defin as those fact and
circumst suffici to caus a person of reason caution to believ that a crime ha
been commit and that the accus commit it it requir more than mere suspicion or
hunch but less than virtual certainti reason ground to believ is probabl as good a
definit as ani
furthermor all warrant must particularli describ the place to be search or the person
or thing to be seiz the particular requir wa intend to prevent prevent the
issuanc of warrant on loos vagu or doubt base of fact an abus that outrag the
constitut drafter gobart import co v unit state 282 us 344 357 1931 in
todai term the claus would prohibit a search warrant in a whitecollar investig or a
subpoena that command the product of all the defend book and record whether
or not relev to the investig or trial
but even if a warrant is technic requir there ar a number of recogn except to
the warrant requir princip
workplac search by govern employ
search incid to arrest
search of motor vehicl
exig or emerg circumst to prevent the destruct of evid or while in
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2419
hot pursuit of a suspect
when the search is conduct pursuant to a valid voluntari consent
when the evid is in plain view
border custom and prison search
