2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/The Warrant Requirement/REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF PRIVACY


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF PRIVACY  
The Fourth Amendment only applies to workplace searches by government employers 
where an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy. Thus, to determine if a 
workplace search will violate an employee’s Fourth Amendment rights, an employer must 
first determine if the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. There is no bright-line rule for determining whether an employee has a reasonable 
privacy expectation in a particular area. Such a privacy interest can exist for a desk drawer, a 
file cabinet, a locker, or even an entire office, depending on the circumstances. The issue is 
whether a reasonable person would expect the area to be free from intrusion. The employee 
does not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the area. Thus, even though a public employer may own the office where an 
employee works, that employee can still have a privacy interest in the office that prohibits 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.421 
the employer from conducting a search.  
 
The key factor to consider is whether the employee has exclusive control over the area in 
question. If so, this tends to show that the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in that area. For instance, assume that an employee has a file cabinet in his office; that he is 
the only person who uses that file cabinet; that the cabinet has a lock on it; that the 
employee is the only person with a key; and that the cabinet remains locked when the 
employee is not using it. These facts indicate that the employee has exclusive control over 
the contents of the file cabinet, and thus has a reasonable expectation of privacy in its 
contents. In other words, based on the circumstances, the employee would be justified in 
believing that others cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without his consent. The 
employee in this scenario has a constitutionally protected privacy interest in the contents of 
the file cabinet. A search of this file cabinet by the public employer would have to comport 
with the reasonableness  standard as discussed above.  
 
But if the file cabinet does not have a lock, if several employees store and retrieve files from 
that cabinet, and if it is generally understood that they can do so without employees’ 
consent, then the employee cannot reasonably expect that the contents of the file cabinet 
will be private. Under these facts, the employee would not have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the file cabinet; therefore, a search of that file cabinet would not violate the 
employee’s Fourth Amendment rights.  
 
Reasonable privacy expectations can also attach to communications. Employees might 
reasonably expect personal phone conversations or e-mail messages to be private and free 
from monitoring.  
 
In terms of surveillance, employees are likely to have reasonable privacy expectations in 
bathrooms, changing rooms, and other personal areas within the workplace.  
 
Obviously, there are a lot of factors that go into determining whether an employee has a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Before conducting a search or surveillance, employers 
should consult legal counsel to make sure they are not intruding upon an employee’s privacy 
interests. 
 



:


reason expect of privaci
the fourth amend onli appli to workplac search by govern employ
where an employe ha a reason expect of privaci thu to determin if a
workplac search will violat an employe fourth amend right an employ must
first determin if the employe ha a reason expect of privaci in the area to be
search there is no brightlin rule for determin whether an employe ha a reason
privaci expect in a particular area such a privaci interest can exist for a desk drawer a
file cabinet a locker or even an entir offic depend on the circumst the issu is
whether a reason person would expect the area to be free from intrus the employe
doe not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reason expect of
privaci in the area thu even though a public employ mai own the offic where an
employe work that employe can still have a privaci interest in the offic that prohibit
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2421
the employ from conduct a search
the kei factor to consid is whether the employe ha exclus control over the area in
question if so thi tend to show that the employe ha a reason expect of privaci
in that area for instanc assum that an employe ha a file cabinet in hi offic that he is
the onli person who us that file cabinet that the cabinet ha a lock on it that the
employe is the onli person with a kei and that the cabinet remain lock when the
employe is not us it these fact indic that the employe ha exclus control over
the content of the file cabinet and thu ha a reason expect of privaci in it
content in other word base on the circumst the employe would be justifi in
believ that other cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without hi consent the
employe in thi scenario ha a constitution protect privaci interest in the content of
the file cabinet a search of thi file cabinet by the public employ would have to comport
with the reason standard as discuss abov
but if the file cabinet doe not have a lock if sever employe store and retriev file from
that cabinet and if it is gener understood that thei can do so without employe
consent then the employe cannot reason expect that the content of the file cabinet
will be privat under these fact the employe would not have a reason expect of
privaci in the file cabinet therefor a search of that file cabinet would not violat the
employe fourth amend right
reason privaci expect can also attach to commun employe might
reason expect person phone convers or email messag to be privat and free
from monitor
in term of surveil employe ar like to have reason privaci expect in
bathroom chang room and other person area within the workplac
obvious there ar a lot of factor that go into determin whether an employe ha a
reason expect of privaci befor conduct a search or surveil employ
should consult legal counsel to make sure thei ar not intrud upon an employe privaci
interest
