2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/Video Surveillance of Employees


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Video Surveillance of Employees 
In some scenarios, investigators may consider the use of video surveillance equipment as 
part of an internal investigation. In general, video surveillance is not permissible in areas 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.431 
where employees have a legitimate expectation of privacy. For instance, an employer is not 
allowed to install video cameras in a restroom or dressing room unless there are special 
circumstances to justify this intrusion on employees’ privacy. Conversely, an employer is 
much more likely to be allowed to use video surveillance in open areas, such as around cash 
registers or in public hallways. These areas are open to the public and an employee could not 
reasonably expect privacy there. It is advisable to provide written notice to employees 
informing them that their activities are subject to monitoring in advance of any surveillance. 
Again, the scope of the surveillance should be no greater than necessary to fulfill the 
employer’s legitimate business purposes.  
 
If video surveillance were accompanied by audio recording, then this type of surveillance 
would be covered by Wiretap Act provisions of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 
which prohibit the interception of wire, electronic, or oral communication  except in limited 
circumstances. However, the ECPA does not cover silent video monitoring. The question in 
this type of surveillance is whether the surveillance violates the employee’s constitutional or 
common law privacy rights. 
 



:


video surveil of employe
in some scenario investig mai consid the us of video surveil equip as
part of an intern investig in gener video surveil is not permiss in area
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2431
where employe have a legitim expect of privaci for instanc an employ is not
allow to instal video camera in a restroom or dress room unless there ar special
circumst to justifi thi intrus on employe privaci convers an employ is
much more like to be allow to us video surveil in open area such as around cash
regist or in public hallwai these area ar open to the public and an employe could not
reason expect privaci there it is advis to provid written notic to employe
inform them that their activ ar subject to monitor in advanc of ani surveil
again the scope of the surveil should be no greater than necessari to fulfil the
employ legitim busi purpos
if video surveil were accompani by audio record then thi type of surveil
would be cover by wiretap act provis of the electron commun privaci act
which prohibit the intercept of wire electron or oral commun except in limit
circumst howev the ecpa doe not cover silent video monitor the question in
thi type of surveil is whether the surveil violat the employe constitut or
common law privaci right
