2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Obtaining Information About Employees/Witness Tampering (18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq.)


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Witness Tampering (18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq.) 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq., makes it a felony to engage 
in “misleading conduct toward another person” with the intent to “influence, delay, or 
prevent” a witness’s testimony or to “cause or induce any person” to “withhold” testimony 
or documents.  
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) makes it a crime to (1) knowingly; (2) use intimidation or physical 
force, threats, or corrupt persuasion; (3) with the intent to induce another; (4) to withhold 
testimony, a record, document, or other object from an official proceeding; or (5) alter, 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.446  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy, mutilate, or conceal; (6) an object; (7) with the intent to impair the object’s integrity 
or availability; (8) for use in an official proceeding. 
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) is the statute under which Arthur Andersen, LLP was charged 
following the Enron scandal. During the investigations into Enron misdeeds, it was found 
that Andersen directed its employees to destroy documents to prevent their retrieval by the 
SEC during the investigation of Enron. However, the Andersen conviction was overturned 
in 2005 because of errors in the jury instructions. 
 
Criminal sanctions have been added to section 1512 for the corrupt alteration or destruction 
of documents. Section 1512(c) makes it a crime to (1) corruptly; (2) alter, destroy, mutilate, 
conceal, or attempt thereto; (3) a record, document, or other object; (4) with the intent to 
impair the object’s integrity or availability for use; (5) in an official proceeding; or (6) 
otherwise obstruct, influence, impede, or attempt thereto, any official proceeding.  
 
Section 1512(c) originally criminalized those who knowingly and corruptly destroyed, or 
directed others to destroy, relevant evidence. However, the U.S. Supreme Court in Arthur 
Andersen LLP vs. United States narrowed the statute to exclude the term knowingly. 
 
Section 1515 provides definitions for certain provisions under obstruction of justice statutes. 
For example, it defines misleading conduct as including, among other things: 
• Knowingly making a false statement 
• Omitting or concealing information that renders a statement misleading 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a writing that is false, forged, altered, or otherwise lacking 
in authenticity with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a materia lly misleading sample, specimen, map, 
photograph, or other object with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly using a trick, scheme, or device with intent to mislead 
 
Unlike obstruction of justice (see below), the Victim and Witness Protection Act statute can 
be violated without any corrupt purpose to obstruct justice, even if there is no grand jury or 
other judicial proceeding pending. Section 1512 only requires proof that the defendant acted 
intentionally with intent to “influence, delay, or prevent” testimony or the withholding of 
evidence. The Act applies to witnesses in a prospective or anticipated proceeding as well as a 
pending one. 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.447 
In light of the Victim and Witness Protection Act, fraud examiners must take care as to how 
he instructs a witness with regard to the confidentiality of the investigation. Confidentiality is 
a legitimate concern, and the investigator needs to instruct a witness concerning how to 
preserve privileges and confidentiality. However, instructing a witness not to speak with 
government investigators or other parties to litigation — or giving instructions that could be 
misunderstood in that way — exposes the investigator and the company to potential witness 
tampering liability. 
 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act also makes it a misdemeanor to harass another 
person and thereby hinder, delay, prevent, or dissuade any person from attending or 
testifying in an official proceeding, reporting a federal offense, causing an arrest for a federal 
offense, or causing a criminal prosecution.  
 



:


wit tamper 18 usc 1512 et seq
the victim and wit protect act 18 usc 1512 et seq make it a feloni to engag
in mislead conduct toward anoth person with the intent to influenc delai or
prevent a witnesss testimoni or to caus or induc ani person to withhold testimoni
or document
section 1512b2a make it a crime to 1 knowingli 2 us intimid or physic
forc threat or corrupt persuas 3 with the intent to induc anoth 4 to withhold
testimoni a record document or other object from an offici proceed or 5 alter
individu right dure examin law
2446 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi mutil or conceal 6 an object 7 with the intent to impair the object integr
or avail 8 for us in an offici proceed
section 1512b2a is the statut under which arthur andersen llp wa charg
follow the enron scandal dure the investig into enron misde it wa found
that andersen direct it employe to destroi document to prevent their retriev by the
sec dure the investig of enron howev the andersen convict wa overturn
in 2005 becaus of error in the juri instruct
crimin sanction have been ad to section 1512 for the corrupt alter or destruct
of document section 1512c make it a crime to 1 corruptli 2 alter destroi mutil
conceal or attempt thereto 3 a record document or other object 4 with the intent to
impair the object integr or avail for us 5 in an offici proceed or 6
otherwis obstruct influenc imped or attempt thereto ani offici proceed
section 1512c origin crimin those who knowingli and corruptli destroi or
direct other to destroi relev evid howev the us suprem court in arthur
andersen llp vs unit state narrow the statut to exclud the term knowingli
section 1515 provid definit for certain provis under obstruct of justic statut
for exampl it defin mislead conduct as includ among other thing
knowingli make a fals statement
omit or conceal inform that render a statement mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a write that is fals forg alter or otherwis lack
in authent with intent to mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a materia lly mislead sampl specimen map
photograph or other object with intent to mislead
knowingli us a trick scheme or devic with intent to mislead
unlik obstruct of justic see below the victim and wit protect act statut can
be violat without ani corrupt purpos to obstruct justic even if there is no grand juri or
other judici proceed pend section 1512 onli requir proof that the defend act
intention with intent to influenc delai or prevent testimoni or the withhold of
evid the act appli to wit in a prospect or anticip proceed as well as a
pend on
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2447
in light of the victim and wit protect act fraud examin must take care as to how
he instruct a wit with regard to the confidenti of the investig confidenti is
a legitim concern and the investig need to instruct a wit concern how to
preserv privileg and confidenti howev instruct a wit not to speak with
govern investig or other parti to litig or give instruct that could be
misunderstood in that wai expos the investig and the compani to potenti wit
tamper liabil
the victim and wit protect act also make it a misdemeanor to harass anoth
person and therebi hinder delai prevent or dissuad ani person from attend or
testifi in an offici proceed report a feder offens caus an arrest for a feder
offens or caus a crimin prosecut
