2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


INSURANCE FRAUD 
 
The insurance business, by its very nature, is susceptible to fraud. Insurance is a risk 
distribution system that requires the accumulation of liquid assets in the form of reserve 
funds, which are in turn available to pay loss claims. Insurance companies generate a large 
steady flow of cash through insurance premiums. Steady cash flow is an important economic 
resource that is very attractive and easily diverted. Large accumulations of liquid assets make 
insurance companies attractive for take over  and loot schemes. Insurance companies are under 
great pressure to maximize the return on investing the reserve funds, thus making them 
vulnerable to high yielding investment schemes.  
 
 
Types of Insurance Policies 
Property insurance indemnifies against pecuniary loss to the insured’s property (a nd, in some 
policies, to the property of others) for specific losses, for example, from fire, theft, or auto 
collision. Casualty insurance indemnifies against legal liability to others for injury or damage to 
people, property, or other defined legal interests because of specified risks or conduct. 
Casualty insurance is of several types, such as health, disability, life, fidelity, and bonds. 
Health insurance indemnifies against medical care costs under specified circumstances.  
 
Disability insurance indemnifies against income loss under defined circumstances. Life insurance 
indemnifies for the death of the insured. Fidelity insurance indemnifies against economic loss 
to the insured because of employee dishonesty. Bonds indemnify against loss to third-party 
beneficiaries when the insured fails to fulfill a specific undertaking for the third  
party’s benefit. 
 
Insurance policies can be marketed in combinations. Homeowners insurance and auto 
insurance policies usually include features of both property and casualty insurance. Some 
health insurance plans, for example, also might include disability benefit provisions. There 
are a multitude of insurance fraud schemes. Likewise, there are fraud schemes that are 
prevalent only in specific insurance areas. The largest amount of fraud is in health care. Like 
all other industries, insurance is susceptible to both internal and external fraud schemes. 
 
  
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1102                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
External health care fraud is perpetrated by outsiders against the company. The two main 
types of external fraud schemes are those committed by providers (such as doctors, 
institutions, and home health agencies) and claim fraud by the insured. Health care frauds —
 a specific variation of insurance fraud — will be discussed in the next chapter. 
 
 
Agent/Broker Fraud 
 
Cash, Loan, and Dividend Checks 
A company employee without the knowledge of an insured or contract holder requests cash, 
a loan, or a dividend check, and either deposits the check into his bank account or into a 
fictitious account. The employee, in order to minimize his chances of being detected 
committing a fraudulent act, might change the company policyholder’s address of record to 
either his address or a fictitious address. Once the check is issued, the address is then 
changed back to the previous address. 
 
Settlement Checks 
Company employees can misdirect settlement checks such as Matured Endowment, Paid 
Up, etc., to the branch office, to their homes, or to fictitious addresses. The employee can 
easily create a check defalcation by changing the address of record prior to the settlement 
check issue date, thus misdirecting the check in question. Also, periodically an orphan 
contract holder might be transferred to his agency affording the opportunity to improperly 
request the issuance of a settlement check. 
 
An orphan contract holder is a policyholder or contract holder who has not been assigned to a 
servicing agent or the whereabouts of this individual is unknown. The servicing agent 
attempts to locate this family group and can possibly influence them to purchase  
additional insurance. 
 
A clerical support employee might receive notification that the orphan contract holder does 
not reside at the given address. This will give the support staffer an opportunity to change 
the address to either his home or a fictitious address and possibly create a fraud. 
 
Premium Fraud 
An agent collects the premium, but doesn’t re mit the check to the insurance company. The 
insured has no coverage. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1103 
Fictitious Payees 
An agent or a clerk can change the beneficiary of record to a fictitious person and 
subsequently submit the necessary papers to authorize the issuance of a check. 
 
Fictitious Death Claims 
An agent or employee obtains a fictitious death certificate and requests that a death claim 
check be issued. The agent receives the check and cashes it. 
 
The sales representative can also write a fictitious application and, after the contestable 
period (two years), submit a phony death claim form and obtain the proceeds. The agent, by 
investing a couple of thousand dollars, could receive $50,000 or more in misappropriated 
claims.  
 
A company is particularly vulnerable to this scheme if the perpetrator has knowledge of the 
underwriting procedures such as the limits under which insurance can be written without a 
medical exam and what should be submitted on a death claim. 
 
 
Underwriting Irregularities 
 
Equity Funding 
Equity funding is the process of using existing premium/policy values to finance new 
businesses. So long as the insured is aware of what is being done by the agent and fully 
understands the long-range method of payment on the new contract, there is no apparent 
underwriting irregularity. 
 
Equity funding techniques, also known as piggybacking, usually do not produce quality 
business. Furthermore, the company increases the amount of life insurance on the books but 
receives little or no new funds while incurring increased sales and administrative expenses 
associated with the issue of that new business. 
 
Each jurisdiction has its own requirements on piggybacking as it relates to replacement 
insurance. Companies must comply with these regulations to prevent being fined or the 
possibility that the company’s insurance license can be suspended or taken away for 
noncompliance. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1104                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Equity funding irregularities might involve improper financial benefits to field personnel as 
well as annual incentive compensation bonuses paid to management if applicable. The fraud 
examiner should determine what financial benefit will occur from an improper equity 
transaction. 
 
Misrepresentation 
Misrepresentation might occur if a sales representative makes a false statement with the 
intent to deceive the prospective insureds in order to knowingly obtain an unlawful gain.  
 
False Information 
A company employee might submit the following false information to obtain unlawful 
financial gain: 
• Improper medical information to obtain a better insurable rate for the prospective 
policyholder (for example, standard to preferred rate). 
• Improper date of birth to obtain a cheaper premium on the new policy. 
• Improper home address to obtain a cheaper premium for home or automobile 
insurance. 
• Improper driving history prior to purchasing automobile insurance to reduce the annual 
premium or obtain insurance where normally the individual would have to apply through 
the risk pool. 
 
Fictitious Policies 
A salesman, in order to keep his position, submits fictitious policies to improve his writing 
record. Also prior to an individual leaving the company he writes fictitious policies called 
tombstone cases to improve his commission pool so that his compensation will be greater. 
Tombstone means an agent literally takes names from tombstones in a cemetery and writes 
new policies.  
 
Surety and Performance Bond Schemes 
Surety and performance bonds guarantee that certain events will or will not occur. An agent 
issues worthless bonds to the insured for high-risk coverage in hopes that a claim is never 
made. If a claim is made, the agent might pay it off from agency funds, delay the payment, or 
skip town. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1105 
Sliding 
Sliding is the term used for including additional coverages in the insurance policy without the 
knowledge of the insured. The extra charges are hidden in the total premium and since the 
insured is unaware of the coverage, few claims are ever filed. For example, motor club 
memberships, accidental death, and travel accident coverages can usually be slipped into the 
policy without the knowledge of the insured. 
 
Twisting 
Twisting is the replacement, usually by high-pressure sales techniques, of existing policies for 
new ones. The primary reason, of course, is for the agent to profit since first year sales 
commissions are much higher than commissions for existing policies. 
 
Churning 
Churning occurs when agents falsely tell customers that they can buy additional insurance for 
nothing by using built-up value in their current policies. In reality, the cost of the new 
policies frequently exceeds the value of the old ones.  
 
 
Vehicle Insurance Schemes 
 
Ditching 
Ditching, also known as owner give-ups, is getting rid of a vehicle to cash in on an insurance 
policy or to settle an outstanding loan. The vehicle is normally expensive and purchased with 
a small down payment. The vehicle is reported stolen, although in some cases, the owner just 
abandons the vehicle hoping that it is stolen, stripped for parts, or taken to a pound and 
destroyed. The scheme sometimes involves homeowner’s insurance for the property that 
was “stolen” in the vehicle. 
 
Past Posting 
Past posting is a scheme in which a person becomes involved in an automobile accident, but 
doesn’t have insurance. The person gets insurance,  waits a little bit of time, and then reports 
the vehicle as being in an accident, thus collecting for the damages. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1106                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Vehicle Repair 
This scheme involves the billing of new parts on a vehicle when used parts were actually 
replaced in the vehicle. Sometimes this involves collusion between the adjuster and the body 
repair shop. 
 
Vehicle Smuggling 
This is a scheme that involves the purchase of a new vehicle with maximum financing. A 
counterfeit certificate of the vehicle’s title is made showing that it is free and clear. The 
vehicle is insured to the maximum, with minimum deductible theft coverage. It is then 
shipped to a foreign port and reported stolen. The car is sold at its new location and 
insurance is also collected for the “theft.” 
 
Phantom Vehicles 
The certificate of title is a document that shows the legal ownership of a vehicle. Even 
though it is not absolute proof that a vehicle exists, it is the basis for the issuance of 
insurance policies. Collecting on a phantom vehicle has been shown to be easy to do. 
 
30-Day Special 
In this scheme, the vehicle’s owner reports the vehicle stolen and hides it just long enough 
for the insurance company to settle the claim—usually 30 days. Once the claim is paid, the 
vehicle is abandoned by the owner. 
 
Paper Accident 
This scheme involves the invention of an auto accident that only exists on paper. When the 
repair costs are less than $1000, many insurance companies don’t bother to send an 
investigator to examine the vehicle. Because this is a low-risk endeavor, and no police are 
involved, this scheme is very popular within organized crime rings.  
 
Hit and Run 
The hit and run is a variation of the paper accident. The owner of a previously damaged 
vehicle calls the police and claims to be the victim of a hit and run accident. The resulting 
police report is used to file an insurance claim. This scheme may also be perpetrated after a 
single-car accident with no witnesses.  
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1107 
Staged Accidents 
Staged accidents are schemes in which an accident is predetermined to occur on a vehicle. 
The schemes are organized by rings and the culprits move from one area to another. They 
often use the same vehicle over and over, which sometimes causes their scheme to  
be uncovered. 
 
Two Vehicle Accident 
Perpetrators cause an accident and then lead the innocent driver to believe it’s his fault. 
 
Three or More Vehicle Accident 
Perpetrators set up an accident in which all the drivers are involved. 
 
Side Swipe 
The side swipe is a scheme that relies on opportunity. In a busy intersection with multiple 
left-turn lanes, the perpetrator makes the left turn over and over again, waiting for a driver to 
cross into his lane. When a driver finally does, the perpetrator purposely drives into the 
other car. Witnesses and police involvement are helpful to the perpetrator in this case. 
 
Drive Down 
The scheme involves a perpetrator waving on a driver attempting to merge in front of him, 
then intentionally colliding with the merging vehicle. After the accident, the perpetrator 
denies having waved on the merging driver. 
 
Other Staged Accidents 
Two drivers purposely collide where they will not be observed. Additional damage may be 
added to the vehicles after impact. The cars are then driven to a road or highway and 
arranged so that the accident appears to have occurred there. The police are then notified. 
 
SWOOP AND SQUAT 
A victim of this scheme will find himself passed by two cars while driving. The car in the 
lead will cut in front of the second, forcing it to stop abruptly. The victim rear-ends the 
second car while the other driver speeds away. Victims usually accept responsibility for the 
accident, thinking it their fault for not paying attention. The rear-ended vehicle usually 
contains the maximum amount of passengers, all with injuries. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1108                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inflated Damages 
The business environment and competition for work in the automobile repair industry have 
motivated a scheme where some establishments inflate the estimated cost to cover the 
deductible. The insured is advised by the repair shop that the shop will accept whatever the 
company authorizes. 
 
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) Switch  
VIN-switch fraud schemes are the work of professionals in which a wrecked vehicle is sold 
and reported as being repaired. The vehicle is not repaired, but the VIN plate is switched 
with a stolen vehicle of the same make and model.  
 
Rental Car Fraud 
A person doesn’t need to own a vehicle to incur automobile fraud. There are several 
schemes that can be perpetrated using rental cars. The most prevalent involve property 
damage, bodily injury, and export fraud. 
 
 
Property Schemes 
Property schemes usually involve the filing of insurance claims for property that never 
existed or for inflated loss amounts. 
 
Inflated Inventory 
Property that is lost through fire is claimed on an insurance form. However, property that 
doesn’t exist also finds its way onto an inventory of the property clai med. Property claimed 
might have been previously sold or never owned by the claimant. 
 
Phony or Inflated Thefts 
A home or car that has been burglarized is the basis for filing a claim for recoveries of 
monies lost. However, as with items “destroyed” by fire above, the items never existed or 
were previously sold. 
 
Paper Boats 
A claim is filed for a boat that sank, but actually never existed. It is not difficult to register a 
boat that is based on a bill of sale. After a period of time, a loss is claimed for the sinking of 
the boat. It is difficult to prove that the boat didn’t exist or wasn’t sunk intentionally. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1109 
Life Insurance Schemes 
 
Fraudulent Death Claims 
To obtain reimbursement for life insurance, a death certificate is required. However, phony 
death certificates are not that difficult to obtain. The person might be very much alive and 
missing or the person might be dead, and the death is past posted. With small settlements, 
death claims are not closely scrutinized and paid relatively easily. 
 
Murder for Profit 
This scheme involves the killing (or arranging for the killing) of a person in order to collect 
the insurance. The death might be made to look like it was an accident or a random killing. 
 
Vanishing Premium Scheme 
This scheme involves insurance companies marketing deceptive “vanishing premium” life 
insurance policies. The idea of the “vanishing premium” policy is that, after a set number of 
years of paying the policy’s premium, the policy would be paid off. At that point the policy 
holder would not have to make any more payments toward the policy. 
 
In reality, though, around the time the policy would be paid off, the insurance company 
would explain that the policy had been revised, and that several more years of payments 
would be necessary. The policy holder would then be faced with a dilemma: either cease 
making payments and risk having the policy lapse due to non-payment, or continue making 
the expensive payments for several more years. 
 
 
Liability Schemes 
In a liability scheme the claimant has claimed an injury that did not occur. The slip-and-fall 
scam is the most common, where a person claims to fall as the result of negligence on behalf 
of the insured.  
 
 
“Red Flags” of Insurance Fraud 
Red flags of insurance fraud may include any of the following: 
• The claim is made a short time after inception of the policy, or after an increase or 
change in the coverage under which the claim is made. This could include the purchase  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1110                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of a scheduled property or jewelry floater policy, or more than one during the time 
before the loss. 
• The insured has a history of many insurance claims and losses. 
• The insured earlier asked his insurance agent hypothetical questions about coverage in 
the event of a loss similar to the actual claim. 
• The insured is very pushy and insistent about a fast settlement, and exhibits more than 
the usual amount of knowledge about insurance coverage and claims procedures, 
particularly if the claim is not well documented. 
• In a burglary loss, the claim includes large, bulky property, which is unusual for  
a burglary. 
• In a theft or fire loss claim, the claim includes a lot of recently purchased, expensive 
property, or the insured insists that everything was the best or the most expensive 
model, especially if the insured cannot provide receipts, owner’s manuals, or other 
documentary proof of purchase. 
• In a fire loss claim, property that would be personal or sentimental to the insured and 
that you would expect to see among the lost property — photographs, family heirlooms, 
or pets — is conspicuous by its absence. 
• A large amount of the property was purchased at garage and yard sales and flea markets, 
or otherwise for cash, and there are no receipts (the insured will usually be unable to 
recall exactly where these sales took place or by whom). 
• The insured cannot remember or does not know where he acquired the claimed 
property, especially unusual items, and/or he cannot provide adequate descriptions. 
• On the other hand, the insured already has receipts and other documentation, witnesses, 
and duplicate photographs for everything; the claim is too perfect. 
• Documentation provided by the insured is irregular or questionable, such as: 
? Numbered receipts are from the same store and dated differently or sequentially. 
? Documents show signs of alteration such as dates, descriptions, or amounts. 
? Photocopies of documents are provided and the insured cannot produce  
the originals. 
? Similar handwriting or signatures — or the insured’s apparent handwriting — on 
different receipts, invoices, gift verifications, appraisals, etc. 
? The amount of tax is wrong, either for the price of the property or for the date 
appearing on the receipt. 
? Receipts, invoices, or shipping documents do not have “paid,” “received,” or other 
shipping stamps. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1111 
? In a theft or loss away from home, the insured waits an unusually long time before 
reporting the theft to the police. 
? The insured is able to give the police a complete list of lost property on the day of 
the burglary or shortly after. 
? The amount of the claim differs from the value given by the insured to the police. 
? In a business inventory or income loss claim, the insured does not keep complete 
books, or the books do not follow accepted accounting principles. 
? The physical evidence is inconsistent with the loss claimed by the insured. 
? In a burglary loss, there is no physical evidence of breaking and entering, or a 
burglary could not have occurred unnoticed under the circumstances. 
? In a fire loss: 
The apparent cause and origin of the fire is inconsistent with an accidental cause and 
origin, or there is evidence of the use of an accelerant. 
The remains of the property do not match the claimed property. 
? The premises do not show signs of having contained the claimed property, or the 
amount of property will not fit into the space where the insured says it was. 
? Physical damage to the insured’s car is inconsistent with its having been in a collision 
with an uninsured car. 
? The insured has discarded the claimed damaged property before the adjuster can 
examine it. 
? The cost of the claimed property, over the period of time it was allegedly acquired, 
seems to exceed the insured’s financial ability to purchase it. 
? The insured refuses or is unable to answer routine questions. 
? The insured provides supporting evidence and documentation that cannot be 
corroborated. 
• Information on a life application is very vague or ambiguous as to the details of health 
history: dates, places of treatment, names of  physicians or hospitals, or specific diagnosis. 
• Applicant fails to sign and date the application. 
• Pertinent questions on the application are not answered, such as income, other insurance 
carried, hazardous duties, or aviation or flying activity. 
• The insured has “excess insurance,” either shown at the time of application or developed 
through an underwriting report of database information. 
• Earned income does not warrant the amount of insurance being applied for. 
• The applicant’s date of birth as shown on the application is much earlier than shown 
with other carriers or in previous applications or policies. 
• The agent is putting on a great deal of pressure to have the policy issued because of the 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1112                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
large amount applied for, but is going over the underwriter’s head in order to do so 
(working out of the system). 
• The physician’s report is very vague on details of past medical history and does not 
coincide with the information shown on the application. 
• A death claim is presented in which the death has taken place outside of the country. 
• The signature on the application for insurance does not appear to be the same signature 
as shown on an authorization at the time of the claim. 
• A claimant or claimant’s attorney attempts to limit the type of information to be related 
by a signed authorization, which is a standard authorization used by the company. 
• An attorney is immediately brought into a contestable death claim, attempting to 
interfere with the investigation and to withhold information required by the company. 
• A contestable death claim that is reported as an accidental death could possibly be a 
suicide (fatal accident involving only one vehicle, a hunting accident, an accidental 
shooting while cleaning a weapon or repairing same, etc.). 
• An autopsy report discloses a different height and weight than what is shown on the 
recent application (auto or house fire death). Dental records do not coincide with those 
dental findings as shown by an autopsy report. 
• Records are missing on a patient who was confined to a hospital, or records are missing 
on a patient from a physician’s office. 
• The death claim package sent to the insurance company is too well packaged and 
complete in every detail with supportive documents. Documentation that was not 
initially requested or required by the insurance company was voluntarily sent, such as 
newspaper reports, burial certificates, shipment of the body from one country to the 
home country. 
• The routine audit of a designated insured group shows a significant increase of added 
employees whose names do not show up on the payroll. 
• Gunshot wounds or stabbings were inflicted by the insured as the aggressor or were  
self-inflicted. 
• Police accident reports were submitted by the claimant. 
• Pressure for speed of handling — claimant wants to stop by the office to pick up his 
check “as we’re leaving for vacation in the morning.” 
• A series of prescription numbers from the same drug store don’t coincide 
chronologically with the dates of the prescriptions. 
• An automobile fire in a very remote rural area with no witness, but the driver claims an 
electrical shortage in the engine compartment caused the entire car to be gutted  
by flames. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1113 
• Preliminary information for a business fire loss or home fire loss indicates considerable 
financial difficulties and financial pressures being brought upon the owner and the fire is 
suspicious in nature and/or origin. 
• An employee within the claims operations of an insurance company is known to have a 
drinking problem, drug problem, financial pressures, or is having serious marital 
difficulties or having an affair and irregularities start to appear. 
• On burglary losses from a business or especially a home, the investigator observes that 
the remaining contents at the scene are of much inferior quality than that which is being 
reported stolen. There is no indication of indentation in the piling of the carpet where 
heavy items of furniture or equipment were to have been placed. There are no hooks or 
nails on the walls where valuable pictures might have been hung. Entrances or exits are 
too small to take a large item through without laboriously disassembling it. 
• Any information on a claim that has been filed if it is determined that there is deliberate 
cover-up or false statements contained therein. 
• A disability income protection claim is filed and it is determined that the claimant had 
recently purchased numerous expensive items on credit and had them all covered by 
credit A&H insurance coverage. 
• Public transportation accidents in which there are more passenger claims filed than there 
were passengers at the time of the accident. 
• A witness to an accident or incident deliberately tries to hide from investigators rather 
than come forth and tell the truth. 
• An official document of findings is in complete conflict with the facts in the case and 
there is no explanation for this conflict of facts. Photographs or other documents do not 
substantiate the reported findings. 
 
 
Computer-Generated Detection Reports 
Computers can be used to generate detection reports that provide the fraud examiner with 
good leads to possible fraud.  
 
Address Similarity Report 
Address similarity reports electronically compare multiple checks going to the same address. 
They are extremely useful because they might show a check defalcation or funds going to 
another insurance company, broker, or fictitious payee.  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1114                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Downloading of Files 
Comparison of issue files to disbursement files can determine if funds are being used to 
place new policies by using the equity of old policies. For example, computer-assisted 
auditing tools and techniques (CAATTs) are used to download and compare electronic files, 
such as comparing the administrative file on group business to the Social Security file to 
determine if the company is paying out monthly payments on people who have passed away. 
 
Electronic Confirmations 
Mailed disbursements in force or lapsed premiums, change of address, etc., to verify that 
company records agree with policyholder records. 
 
Exception or Manual Override Reports 
Computerized reports that list all exceptions to normal electronic processing. All human 
intervention can appear on a periodic management information report and be test-checked 
by management. It is imperative that management review on an ongoing basis all exception 
reports for possible frauds. 
 
 
Workers' Compensation Fraud 
Workers' compensation laws require employers or their insurance plan to reimburse an 
employee (or on his behalf) for injuries that occurred on the job regardless of who is at fault 
and without delay of legal proceedings to determine fault. The injury may be physical, such 
as a broken limb, or mental, such as stress. 
 
Common Schemes 
Schemes are generally broken into four categories: premium fraud, agent fraud, claimant 
fraud, and organized fraud schemes. 
 
Premium Fraud  
Misrepresenting information to the insurer by employers to lower the cost of workers’ 
compensation premiums. 
 
EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION 
Workers’ compensation rates vary depending on the job classification of an employee. 
Employees that have a higher risk for injury on the job will have a higher premium rate. 
Clerical employees have a lower probability for an injury than, for example, truck drivers or 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1115 
construction workers, and accordingly their premiums should be lower. Therefore to lower 
their premium rate, an employer might intentionally misclassify employees. 
 
UNDERSTATEMENT OF PAYROLL 
The premium for a specific job classification is based on the total payroll for that 
classification. The employer may understate the amount of the payroll for higher risk 
classifications. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Two men in Massachusetts pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy and mail fraud in 
connection with a fraudulent scheme to re duce workers’ compensation claims for a 
construction company. The men falsely reported that workers in high-risk trades were 
engaged in less dangerous occupations in order to lower premiums. They also concealed 
millions of dollars on the company payroll from the insurance company, thereby avoiding 
workers’ compensation payments on those dollars. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Boise couple found themselves responsible for a $71,049 judgment after being accused of 
misreporting payroll in their drywall business. Two former employees tipped off investigators 
that they were being paid with checks bearing different company names. 
 
Half of their payroll money was paid by an insured drywall company, and the other half 
came from one that was not insured. Workers’ compensation claims came from the 
company that was paying premiums.  
 
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION OF THE INSURED’S OPERATION 
Premium rates differ significantly based on geographic location from state to state. An 
employer might have a storefront location or a P.O. box in a state that has lower rates. A 
multistate employer may list all of its employees as operating in the state that has the lowest 
rates. 
 
HISTORY OF PAST LOSSES 
The modification or “mod” factor is a multiplier that is used to determine premium rates. 
The multiplier is derived by comparing the employer’s claims history with other employers’ 
claims histories in the same industry. The higher the claims loss, the higher the mod, and 
thus the higher the premium. A new business will start with a neutral mod for that type of 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1116                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. Employers that have a high mod factor may become a “new” business that does 
not have a mod established and thus have lower premiums than it should.  
 
CORPORATE GERRYMANDERING 
The risk pool assigned to an employer will accept any business no matter what the claim 
experience is. However, it does not have to accept any employer that owes premiums. Some 
employers will create a new corporate entity in order to obtain coverage or to avoid higher 
premiums due to past heavy losses. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fireman’s Fund Insurance was awarded a $15 million judgment against a Hollywood 
entertainment company in a suit involving a workers’ compensation fraud scheme. The 
entertainment company set up a shell corporation to pose as a start-up production company 
needing insurance. The ruse allowed the company to get workers’ compensation at much 
lower rates than if Fireman’s Fund had known who they were actually insuring. The 
entertainment company then manipulated the coverage to other films in which it had an 
interest, again at significantly lower rates.  
 
FORGED DOCUMENTS 
Some employers will forge or alter prior certificates showing coverages in order to collect 
payment for work done or as proof of coverages to authorities. 
 
Agent Fraud  
POCKETING PREMIUMS 
Agents issue certificates of coverage indicating the customer is insured, but never forward 
the premium to the insurance company.  
 
CONSPIRING TO REDUCE PREMIUMS 
Agents may alter the application for coverage completed by the employer in order to be able 
to offer a lower premium to his client.  
 
The agent may also improperly advise the employer as to how to complete the application.  
 
The agent may also advise the employer to transfer a group of employees into a lower risk 
classification to avoid the experience modifier. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1117 
While the employer may not be aware that the schemes are a violation of law, since the 
employer signs the application, he can be charged for his part in the scheme however 
unknowing. 
 
Claimant Fraud 
Misrepresenting the circumstances of any injury or fabricating that an injury occurred. 
 
INJURY FRAUD 
In this type of fraud, false information about the injured worker is submitted to the workers’ 
compensation carrier. The report describes the injury and states the employee is either totally 
or partially disabled and either unable to work or only able to work part-time. In many of 
these schemes the fraud is helped along by a doctor who, for a fee, will provide a false 
diagnosis and false medical records for phony treatments. 
 
The employee may stage an accident and fabricate an injury, or actually have an accident, and 
then exaggerate the injury.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A former personnel supervisor for the city of Los Angeles was charged with embezzling 
funds from the city’s workers’ compensation  system. It was charged that she provided 
information to a doctor that enabled him to submit almost $500,000 in fake claims for 
medical services that were supposedly provided  to city employees. The supervisor was also 
alleged to have, working on her own, altered the computerized personnel records and then 
authorized payment of $300,000 in bogus disa bility claims to her friends and relatives.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A firefighter in Washington was arrested for insurance fraud related to workers’ 
compensation payments he had received. The man claimed he fell off a ladder and injured 
his knee while working as a meat  cutter in a grocery store. He  collected temporary disability 
benefits and received medical treatment for six months, complaining of pain and telling 
doctors that he could barely walk. At the same time, the man was training with his city fire 
department as a reserve firefighter. The training consisted of strenuous exercise such as 
heavy lifting and an hour of physical training each day.  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1118                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT 
Employees who are collecting workers’ compensation benefits may also secure a job with 
another employer — either part-time or full-time. The employee may fake his identity or 
assume someone else’s identity to receive compensation. 
 
Organized Fraud 
Organized fraud schemes are composed of the united efforts of a lawyer, a capper, a doctor, 
and the claimant. This scheme is used not only in workers’ compensation cases, but also in 
other medical frauds, such as automobile injuries. 
 
THE LAWYER 
Lawyers are usually the organizers of the schemes and the ones who will profit the most. 
The majority of workers’ compensation cases are accepted on a contingency fee basis. If no 
settlement is awarded, then the lawyers will not be paid. This is a high volume business, and 
the lawyers do not want the cases to be litigated. They are relying on the insurance 
company’s desire to settle as quickly as possible.  
 
The lawyers will entice the claimant into securing their services by promising a large 
settlement from the insurance company. The claimants may or may not have to undergo the 
medical tests, since the only requirement of the claimants is that they be insured. The lawyer 
will then refer the injured party to a doctor for “treatment.” 
 
THE CAPPER 
Cappers, also known as runners or steerers, are used to recruit patients for the scheme. They 
may be employed by either the attorney or doctor and are paid, either on a percentage of the 
total take or on a per person basis, for bringing in patients. Cappers may approach patients 
at unemployment compensation lines, work sites, scenes of accidents, or at any other types 
of organized gatherings. With promises of enrichment, patients are brought into the scheme. 
 
EXAMPLE 
In August of 2010, the last member of a group of 51 suspects in Miami, Florida was 
arrested for insurance fraud and other crimes. The insurance fraud included clinic workers 
and owners who hired runners to recruit auto accident victims, as well as staged auto 
accident participants when they ran out of “legitimate” accident victims. Runners received 
$500 to $700 per patient, and the estimated fraudulent claims from this scheme exceeded 
$4 million.   
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1119 
THE DOCTOR 
Doctors may be organizers or players in the scheme, but must be a part of it in order for it 
to work properly. Doctors are used to lend authenticity to the scheme, and they are well 
compensated for their efforts. The doctors bill for services that they may or may not render 
as well as for unnecessary services. In addition, if patients have regular health insurance, 
doctors may double bill for the services. If an injury is the result of an automobile accident 
that occurred while the patient was on the job, the doctor may bill all three insurance 
companies: the workers’ compensation carrier, the employee’s health insurance, and the 
automobile carrier. 
 
Because of coordination of benefit clauses in most insurance contracts, the insurance 
companies will coordinate the benefits to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be 
100 percent of the injuries. However, the doctors will not let the patient’s health insurance 
company know that the injury is work-related or accident-related and thus the claim may be 
overpaid, since both claims are paid at their full liability.  
 
Most of the treatment rendered will be office visits, x-rays, vascular studies, physical therapy, 
and spinal manipulations. In some cases hospital employees will be part of the scheme and 
allow the use of the facility fraudulently.  
 
Red Flags 
• Documents that have obviously been altered; white-out or erasure is evident. 
• Documents that are improperly filled out with entries in the wrong place or information 
that doesn’t make sense. 
• Claims filed where the carrier indicated no record of coverage. 
• Poor quality photocopies of documents that should be original documents. 
• Small payrolls for large contractors or employee leasing operations. 
• Payroll figures reported to insurers that disagree with payroll reported for other 
purposes. 
• Claims for employee injuries inconsistent with that employee’s classification. 
• Industrial or construction enterprises with a work force reported to be in low-rate 
categories. 
• “New” corporations on ongoing jobs. 
• Most of the employees from an employer  with a high experience suddenly become 
employees in a new business. 
• Agency employs large numbers of support staff and only has one licensed agent. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1120                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The agent only accepts cash or money orders for premiums. 
• No policy is received after an extended time. 
• No bill is received for premiums. 
• Employer review of the application indicates that it is inaccurate. 
• The reclassification of the individual employees into a lower classification. 
• The employer begins to declare a smaller payroll. 
• Claimants that have or are: 
? Disgruntled, soon-to-retire, or facing disciplinary action or layoffs. 
? Involved in seasonal work that is about to end. 
? Taken unexplained or excessive time off prior to claimed injury. 
? Taken more time off than the claimed injury seems to warrant. 
? No witnesses to the accident. 
? Accidents that occurred in an area where the employee normally would not be 
working (especially if it’s a high-risk area). 
? Delayed the reporting of an accident. 
? New on the job or have a history of short-term employment. 
? A history of injuries. 
? Inappropriate or lack of medical treatment for injuries. 
? Experiencing financial difficulties. 
? Changed physicians when a work release has been issued. 
? Frequently changed medical providers. 
? Demands for quick or early settlement. 
? Never at home after a “serious” injury or can only be reached by return  
telephone calls. 
? Unusually familiar with workers’ compensation procedures. 
? Consistently uncooperative. 
? Received mail at a post office box or at an address different from employment or 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
? Soft tissue injuries that are hard to prove. 
? Incapacitated, but seen in activities that require full mobility. 
? Independent medical exams that reveal conflicting medical information. 
? A history of self or family employment; have a trade or work in a cash business. 
? Injuries that occur in an area where the employee would normally not be working. 
? Injuries that would not normally be the type the employee should have. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1121 
? Injuries that occur on a late Friday afternoon or are reported on a Monday morning 
(if injuries are reported Monday morning, the injury could have resulted over  
the weekend). 
? Actively involved in contact sports or physically demanding hobbies. 
? Dates of disability or absences from work that does not coincide with the physician’s 
date of disability or dates of treatment. 
? Unprofessional diagnostic terminology. 
? Misspelled medical terminology throughout the medical report or hospital record. 
? A pattern of accident claims by an individual or family members. 
• Claimant that repeatedly doesn’t show up for his requested independent physical 
examinations or is not home when the regularly scheduled nurse stops by for therapy. 
• The claimant’s attorney is known for handling suspicious claims. 
• Attorney reports his representation began on the day of the reported incident. 
• Same doctor and attorney are known to handle these types of cases. 
• Claimant complains to the insurance company’s CEO in order to press for payment. 
• The attorney threatens further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made. 
• The attorney inquires about a settlement early into the life of the claim. 
• Wholesale claim handling by law firms and multiple class action suits. 
• Dates of the accident are vague or contradictory. 
• Treatment for the injury follows previous first-time visits to a provider. 
• Same provider always bills for extra time or extra consideration on a claim. 
• Provider is working through an attorney. 
• Provider is reluctant to communicate with the insurance company. 
• Provider shares the same patients with the same colleagues. 
• Provider refers patients to specific other providers. 
• Provider prescribes unnecessary supplies and/or care by a specific provider. 
• Medical records are “canned.” 
• Medical records are out of sequence and missing dates of service. 
• Different handwriting with same dates of service. 
• Lost, burned, or stolen records when requested. 
• Progress notes consistently reflect that the patient has a high degree of pain, yet his 
condition is improving or progressing as planned. 
• Inconsistent diagnosis for the treatment rendered. 
• Provider bills on a holiday or Sundays. 
• Conflicting medical reports. 
• Claims are photocopied. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1122                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Claims for other patients are identical. 
• Billing or harassing the insurance company for payment. 
• Claimants address is different on the claim form than it is on the enrollment file. 
 
Premium Fraud Investigation Tips 
• Review the application for coverage for completeness and accuracy. 
• If the business is claiming to be new, then it should be verified that it is indeed new and 
no mod factors have been established. 
• Review the underwriting of the application for suspicious activity. If the company is a 
large company and has a small payroll, verify the number of employees, as well as their 
classification. 
• Review claims to determine if they are consistent with the type of employment reported 
and the number of employees claimed. 
• Conduct an on-site audit of their payroll and related records for the policy period as well 
as to determine where their principal place of employment is located. 
• Observe if there are too many clerical employees or other low risk occupations that 
make up the calculation leading you to believe that the records are misstated. 
• Analyze the financial statements, when available, to determine what payroll expenses 
actually are compared to what is reported. 
• Review accident and injury reports for suspicious activities. 
• Conduct surveillance as needed to observe and document various activities. 
• Document findings and report the results of the activity as required.  
 
Claimant Fraud Investigation Tips
• In spite of the possible indicators of fraud, medical treatment must be secured 
immediately, but an investigation should be opened immediately if there is a suspicion of 
fraud. 
• The manager who is responsible for the area where the injury occurred should initiate an 
investigation on each reportable accident. 
• As soon as possible the accident should be discussed with the employee. 
• Obtain a signed statement from the employee as soon as the employee is able to do so. 
• In obtaining a signed statement, the following questions should be answered as 
applicable: 
? What was the employee doing just prior to the accident, and after the accident? 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1123 
? Was the employee carrying out his regular duties and in the manner they should 
normally be conducted? 
? Had the employee been properly instructed as to how to safely perform the duties? 
When, and by whom? 
? Did they work in accordance with these instructions? 
? Did another employee cause the injury? 
? Was the equipment or machinery properly guarded and in good condition? 
? Was the equipment suited for the purpose it was being used? 
? Was the workplace properly lighted? 
? What were the housekeeping conditions in the area? 
? Does the work being done by the injured employee differ in any way from that being 
performed by other employees? 
? Is there a safer way that his operation can be performed? 
? Was the injured employee in good health when he reported to work on the date of 
the accident? 
 
Have an independent medical examination performed to document the illness. The person 
performing the exam should photograph the patient, obtain a copy of the patient’s photo 
identification such as a driver’s license, and obtain the patient’s signature. 
The following questions should be asked: 
• Are you disabled from working? 
• Are you now working part-time, full-time, or not at all? 
• What are your daily activities? 
• What is your activity level with regards to your ability to walk, jog, run, drive, swim, or 
participate in sports activities or hobbies? 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1201 



:


insur fraud
the insur busi by it veri natur is suscept to fraud insur is a risk
distribut system that requir the accumul of liquid asset in the form of reserv
fund which ar in turn avail to pai loss claim insur compani gener a larg
steadi flow of cash through insur premium steadi cash flow is an import econom
resourc that is veri attract and easili divert larg accumul of liquid asset make
insur compani attract for take over and loot scheme insur compani ar under
great pressur to maxim the return on invest the reserv fund thu make them
vulner to high yield invest scheme
type of insur polici
properti insur indemnifi against pecuniari loss to the insur properti a nd in some
polici to the properti of other for specif loss for exampl from fire theft or auto
collis casualti insur indemnifi against legal liabil to other for injuri or damag to
peopl properti or other defin legal interest becaus of specifi risk or conduct
casualti insur is of sever type such as health disabl life fidel and bond
health insur indemnifi against medic care cost under specifi circumst
disabl insur indemnifi against incom loss under defin circumst life insur
indemnifi for the death of the insur fidel insur indemnifi against econom loss
to the insur becaus of employe dishonesti bond indemnifi against loss to thirdparti
beneficiari when the insur fail to fulfil a specif undertak for the third
parti benefit
insur polici can be market in combin homeown insur and auto
insur polici usual includ featur of both properti and casualti insur some
health insur plan for exampl also might includ disabl benefit provis there
ar a multitud of insur fraud scheme likewis there ar fraud scheme that ar
preval onli in specif insur area the largest amount of fraud is in health care like
all other industri insur is suscept to both intern and extern fraud scheme
insur fraud financi transact
11102 2011 fraud examin manual
extern health care fraud is perpetr by outsid against the compani the two main
type of extern fraud scheme ar those commit by provid such as doctor
institut and home health agenc and claim fraud by the insur health care fraud
a specif variat of insur fraud will be discuss in the next chapter
agentbrok fraud
cash loan and dividend check
a compani employe without the knowledg of an insur or contract holder request cash
a loan or a dividend check and either deposit the check into hi bank account or into a
fictiti account the employe in order to minim hi chanc of be detect
commit a fraudul act might chang the compani policyhold address of record to
either hi address or a fictiti address onc the check is issu the address is then
chang back to the previou address
settlement check
compani employe can misdirect settlement check such as matur endow paid
up etc to the branch offic to their home or to fictiti address the employe can
easili creat a check defalc by chang the address of record prior to the settlement
check issu date thu misdirect the check in question also period an orphan
contract holder might be transfer to hi agenc afford the opportun to improperli
request the issuanc of a settlement check
an orphan contract holder is a policyhold or contract holder who ha not been assign to a
servic agent or the whereabout of thi individu is unknown the servic agent
attempt to locat thi famili group and can possibl influenc them to purchas
addit insur
a cleric support employe might receiv notif that the orphan contract holder doe
not resid at the given address thi will give the support staffer an opportun to chang
the address to either hi home or a fictiti address and possibl creat a fraud
premium fraud
an agent collect the premium but doesnt re mit the check to the insur compani the
insur ha no coverag
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11103
fictiti paye
an agent or a clerk can chang the beneficiari of record to a fictiti person and
subsequ submit the necessari paper to author the issuanc of a check
fictiti death claim
an agent or employe obtain a fictiti death certif and request that a death claim
check be issu the agent receiv the check and cash it
the sale repres can also write a fictiti applic and after the contest
period two year submit a phoni death claim form and obtain the proce the agent by
invest a coupl of thousand dollar could receiv 50000 or more in misappropri
claim
a compani is particularli vulner to thi scheme if the perpetr ha knowledg of the
underwrit procedur such as the limit under which insur can be written without a
medic exam and what should be submit on a death claim
underwrit irregular
equiti fund
equiti fund is the process of us exist premiumpolici valu to financ new
busi so long as the insur is awar of what is be done by the agent and fulli
understand the longrang method of payment on the new contract there is no appar
underwrit irregular
equiti fund techniqu also known as piggyback usual do not produc qualiti
busi furthermor the compani increas the amount of life insur on the book but
receiv littl or no new fund while incur increas sale and administr expens
associ with the issu of that new busi
each jurisdict ha it own requir on piggyback as it relat to replac
insur compani must compli with these regul to prevent be fine or the
possibl that the compani insur licens can be suspend or taken awai for
noncompli
insur fraud financi transact
11104 2011 fraud examin manual
equiti fund irregular might involv improp financi benefit to field personnel as
well as annual incent compens bonus paid to manag if applic the fraud
examin should determin what financi benefit will occur from an improp equiti
transact
misrepresent
misrepresent might occur if a sale repres make a fals statement with the
intent to deceiv the prospect insur in order to knowingli obtain an unlaw gain
fals inform
a compani employe might submit the follow fals inform to obtain unlaw
financi gain
improp medic inform to obtain a better insur rate for the prospect
policyhold for exampl standard to prefer rate
improp date of birth to obtain a cheaper premium on the new polici
improp home address to obtain a cheaper premium for home or automobil
insur
improp drive histori prior to purchas automobil insur to reduc the annual
premium or obtain insur where normal the individu would have to appli through
the risk pool
fictiti polici
a salesman in order to keep hi posit submit fictiti polici to improv hi write
record also prior to an individu leav the compani he write fictiti polici call
tombston case to improv hi commiss pool so that hi compens will be greater
tombston mean an agent liter take name from tombston in a cemeteri and write
new polici
sureti and perform bond scheme
sureti and perform bond guarante that certain event will or will not occur an agent
issu worthless bond to the insur for highrisk coverag in hope that a claim is never
made if a claim is made the agent might pai it off from agenc fund delai the payment or
skip town
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11105
slide
slide is the term us for includ addit coverag in the insur polici without the
knowledg of the insur the extra charg ar hidden in the total premium and sinc the
insur is unawar of the coverag few claim ar ever file for exampl motor club
membership accident death and travel accid coverag can usual be slip into the
polici without the knowledg of the insur
twist
twist is the replac usual by highpressur sale techniqu of exist polici for
new on the primari reason of cours is for the agent to profit sinc first year sale
commiss ar much higher than commiss for exist polici
churn
churn occur when agent fals tell custom that thei can bui addit insur for
noth by us builtup valu in their current polici in realiti the cost of the new
polici frequent exce the valu of the old on
vehicl insur scheme
ditch
ditch also known as owner giveup is get rid of a vehicl to cash in on an insur
polici or to settl an outstand loan the vehicl is normal expens and purchas with
a small down payment the vehicl is report stolen although in some case the owner just
abandon the vehicl hope that it is stolen strip for part or taken to a pound and
destroi the scheme sometim involv homeown insur for the properti that
wa stolen in the vehicl
past post
past post is a scheme in which a person becom involv in an automobil accid but
doesnt have insur the person get insur wait a littl bit of time and then report
the vehicl as be in an accid thu collect for the damag
insur fraud financi transact
11106 2011 fraud examin manual
vehicl repair
thi scheme involv the bill of new part on a vehicl when us part were actual
replac in the vehicl sometim thi involv collus between the adjust and the bodi
repair shop
vehicl smuggl
thi is a scheme that involv the purchas of a new vehicl with maximum financ a
counterfeit certif of the vehicl titl is made show that it is free and clear the
vehicl is insur to the maximum with minimum deduct theft coverag it is then
ship to a foreign port and report stolen the car is sold at it new locat and
insur is also collect for the theft
phantom vehicl
the certif of titl is a document that show the legal ownership of a vehicl even
though it is not absolut proof that a vehicl exist it is the basi for the issuanc of
insur polici collect on a phantom vehicl ha been shown to be easi to do
30dai special
in thi scheme the vehicl owner report the vehicl stolen and hide it just long enough
for the insur compani to settl the claimusu 30 dai onc the claim is paid the
vehicl is abandon by the owner
paper accid
thi scheme involv the invent of an auto accid that onli exist on paper when the
repair cost ar less than 1000 mani insur compani dont bother to send an
investig to examin the vehicl becaus thi is a lowrisk endeavor and no polic ar
involv thi scheme is veri popular within organ crime ring
hit and run
the hit and run is a variat of the paper accid the owner of a previous damag
vehicl call the polic and claim to be the victim of a hit and run accid the result
polic report is us to file an insur claim thi scheme mai also be perpetr after a
singlecar accid with no wit
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11107
stage accid
stage accid ar scheme in which an accid is predetermin to occur on a vehicl
the scheme ar organ by ring and the culprit move from on area to anoth thei
often us the same vehicl over and over which sometim caus their scheme to
be uncov
two vehicl accid
perpetr caus an accid and then lead the innoc driver to believ it hi fault
three or more vehicl accid
perpetr set up an accid in which all the driver ar involv
side swipe
the side swipe is a scheme that reli on opportun in a busi intersect with multipl
leftturn lane the perpetr make the left turn over and over again wait for a driver to
cross into hi lane when a driver final doe the perpetr purpos drive into the
other car wit and polic involv ar help to the perpetr in thi case
drive down
the scheme involv a perpetr wave on a driver attempt to merg in front of him
then intention collid with the merg vehicl after the accid the perpetr
deni have wave on the merg driver
other stage accid
two driver purpos collid where thei will not be observ addit damag mai be
ad to the vehicl after impact the car ar then driven to a road or highwai and
arrang so that the accid appear to have occur there the polic ar then notifi
swoop and squat
a victim of thi scheme will find himself pass by two car while drive the car in the
lead will cut in front of the second forc it to stop abruptli the victim rearend the
second car while the other driver speed awai victim usual accept respons for the
accid think it their fault for not pai attent the rearend vehicl usual
contain the maximum amount of passeng all with injuri
insur fraud financi transact
11108 2011 fraud examin manual
inflat damag
the busi environ and competit for work in the automobil repair industri have
motiv a scheme where some establish inflat the estim cost to cover the
deduct the insur is advis by the repair shop that the shop will accept whatev the
compani author
vehicl identif number vin switch
vinswitch fraud scheme ar the work of profession in which a wreck vehicl is sold
and report as be repair the vehicl is not repair but the vin plate is switch
with a stolen vehicl of the same make and model
rental car fraud
a person doesnt need to own a vehicl to incur automobil fraud there ar sever
scheme that can be perpetr us rental car the most preval involv properti
damag bodili injuri and export fraud
properti scheme
properti scheme usual involv the file of insur claim for properti that never
exist or for inflat loss amount
inflat inventori
properti that is lost through fire is claim on an insur form howev properti that
doesnt exist also find it wai onto an inventori of the properti clai med properti claim
might have been previous sold or never own by the claimant
phoni or inflat theft
a home or car that ha been burglar is the basi for file a claim for recoveri of
moni lost howev as with item destroi by fire abov the item never exist or
were previous sold
paper boat
a claim is file for a boat that sank but actual never exist it is not difficult to regist a
boat that is base on a bill of sale after a period of time a loss is claim for the sink of
the boat it is difficult to prove that the boat didnt exist or wasnt sunk intention
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11109
life insur scheme
fraudul death claim
to obtain reimburs for life insur a death certif is requir howev phoni
death certif ar not that difficult to obtain the person might be veri much aliv and
miss or the person might be dead and the death is past post with small settlement
death claim ar not close scrutin and paid rel easili
murder for profit
thi scheme involv the kill or arrang for the kill of a person in order to collect
the insur the death might be made to look like it wa an accid or a random kill
vanish premium scheme
thi scheme involv insur compani market decept vanish premium life
insur polici the idea of the vanish premium polici is that after a set number of
year of pai the polici premium the polici would be paid off at that point the polici
holder would not have to make ani more payment toward the polici
in realiti though around the time the polici would be paid off the insur compani
would explain that the polici had been revis and that sever more year of payment
would be necessari the polici holder would then be face with a dilemma either ceas
make payment and risk have the polici laps due to nonpay or continu make
the expens payment for sever more year
liabil scheme
in a liabil scheme the claimant ha claim an injuri that did not occur the slipandfal
scam is the most common where a person claim to fall as the result of neglig on behalf
of the insur
red flag of insur fraud
red flag of insur fraud mai includ ani of the follow
the claim is made a short time after incept of the polici or after an increas or
chang in the coverag under which the claim is made thi could includ the purchas
insur fraud financi transact
11110 2011 fraud examin manual
of a schedul properti or jewelri floater polici or more than on dure the time
befor the loss
the insur ha a histori of mani insur claim and loss
the insur earlier ask hi insur agent hypothet question about coverag in
the event of a loss similar to the actual claim
the insur is veri pushi and insist about a fast settlement and exhibit more than
the usual amount of knowledg about insur coverag and claim procedur
particularli if the claim is not well document
in a burglari loss the claim includ larg bulki properti which is unusu for
a burglari
in a theft or fire loss claim the claim includ a lot of recent purchas expens
properti or the insur insist that everyth wa the best or the most expens
model especi if the insur cannot provid receipt owner manual or other
documentari proof of purchas
in a fire loss claim properti that would be person or sentiment to the insur and
that you would expect to see among the lost properti photograph famili heirloom
or pet is conspicu by it absenc
a larg amount of the properti wa purchas at garag and yard sale and flea market
or otherwis for cash and there ar no receipt the insur will usual be unabl to
recal exactli where these sale took place or by whom
the insur cannot rememb or doe not know where he acquir the claim
properti especi unusu item andor he cannot provid adequ descript
on the other hand the insur alreadi ha receipt and other document wit
and duplic photograph for everyth the claim is too perfect
document provid by the insur is irregular or question such as
number receipt ar from the same store and date differ or sequenti
document show sign of alter such as date descript or amount
photocopi of document ar provid and the insur cannot produc
the origin
similar handwrit or signatur or the insur appar handwrit on
differ receipt invoic gift verif apprais etc
the amount of tax is wrong either for the price of the properti or for the date
appear on the receipt
receipt invoic or ship document do not have paid receiv or other
ship stamp
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11111
in a theft or loss awai from home the insur wait an unusu long time befor
report the theft to the polic
the insur is abl to give the polic a complet list of lost properti on the dai of
the burglari or shortli after
the amount of the claim differ from the valu given by the insur to the polic
in a busi inventori or incom loss claim the insur doe not keep complet
book or the book do not follow accept account principl
the physic evid is inconsist with the loss claim by the insur
in a burglari loss there is no physic evid of break and enter or a
burglari could not have occur unnot under the circumst
in a fire loss
the appar caus and origin of the fire is inconsist with an accident caus and
origin or there is evid of the us of an acceler
the remain of the properti do not match the claim properti
the premis do not show sign of have contain the claim properti or the
amount of properti will not fit into the space where the insur sai it wa
physic damag to the insur car is inconsist with it have been in a collis
with an uninsur car
the insur ha discard the claim damag properti befor the adjust can
examin it
the cost of the claim properti over the period of time it wa allegedli acquir
seem to exce the insur financi abil to purchas it
the insur refus or is unabl to answer routin question
the insur provid support evid and document that cannot be
corrobor
inform on a life applic is veri vagu or ambigu as to the detail of health
histori date place of treatment name of physician or hospit or specif diagnosi
applic fail to sign and date the applic
pertin question on the applic ar not answer such as incom other insur
carri hazard duti or aviat or fly activ
the insur ha excess insur either shown at the time of applic or develop
through an underwrit report of databas inform
earn incom doe not warrant the amount of insur be appli for
the applic date of birth as shown on the applic is much earlier than shown
with other carrier or in previou applic or polici
the agent is put on a great deal of pressur to have the polici issu becaus of the
insur fraud financi transact
11112 2011 fraud examin manual
larg amount appli for but is go over the underwrit head in order to do so
work out of the system
the physician report is veri vagu on detail of past medic histori and doe not
coincid with the inform shown on the applic
a death claim is present in which the death ha taken place outsid of the countri
the signatur on the applic for insur doe not appear to be the same signatur
as shown on an author at the time of the claim
a claimant or claimant attornei attempt to limit the type of inform to be relat
by a sign author which is a standard author us by the compani
an attornei is immedi brought into a contest death claim attempt to
interfer with the investig and to withhold inform requir by the compani
a contest death claim that is report as an accident death could possibl be a
suicid fatal accid involv onli on vehicl a hunt accid an accident
shoot while clean a weapon or repair same etc
an autopsi report disclos a differ height and weight than what is shown on the
recent applic auto or hous fire death dental record do not coincid with those
dental find as shown by an autopsi report
record ar miss on a patient who wa confin to a hospit or record ar miss
on a patient from a physician offic
the death claim packag sent to the insur compani is too well packag and
complet in everi detail with support document document that wa not
initi request or requir by the insur compani wa voluntarili sent such as
newspap report burial certif shipment of the bodi from on countri to the
home countri
the routin audit of a design insur group show a signific increas of ad
employe whose name do not show up on the payrol
gunshot wound or stab were inflict by the insur as the aggressor or were
selfinflict
polic accid report were submit by the claimant
pressur for speed of handl claimant want to stop by the offic to pick up hi
check as were leav for vacat in the morn
a seri of prescript number from the same drug store dont coincid
chronolog with the date of the prescript
an automobil fire in a veri remot rural area with no wit but the driver claim an
electr shortag in the engin compart caus the entir car to be gut
by flame
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11113
preliminari inform for a busi fire loss or home fire loss indic consider
financi difficulti and financi pressur be brought upon the owner and the fire is
suspici in natur andor origin
an employe within the claim oper of an insur compani is known to have a
drink problem drug problem financi pressur or is have seriou marit
difficulti or have an affair and irregular start to appear
on burglari loss from a busi or especi a home the investig observ that
the remain content at the scene ar of much inferior qualiti than that which is be
report stolen there is no indic of indent in the pile of the carpet where
heavi item of furnitur or equip were to have been place there ar no hook or
nail on the wall where valuabl pictur might have been hung entranc or exit ar
too small to take a larg item through without labori disassembl it
ani inform on a claim that ha been file if it is determin that there is deliber
coverup or fals statement contain therein
a disabl incom protect claim is file and it is determin that the claimant had
recent purchas numer expens item on credit and had them all cover by
credit ah insur coverag
public transport accid in which there ar more passeng claim file than there
were passeng at the time of the accid
a wit to an accid or incid deliber tri to hide from investig rather
than come forth and tell the truth
an offici document of find is in complet conflict with the fact in the case and
there is no explan for thi conflict of fact photograph or other document do not
substanti the report find
computergener detect report
comput can be us to gener detect report that provid the fraud examin with
good lead to possibl fraud
address similar report
address similar report electron compar multipl check go to the same address
thei ar extrem us becaus thei might show a check defalc or fund go to
anoth insur compani broker or fictiti paye
insur fraud financi transact
11114 2011 fraud examin manual
download of file
comparison of issu file to disburs file can determin if fund ar be us to
place new polici by us the equiti of old polici for exampl computerassist
audit tool and techniqu caatt ar us to download and compar electron file
such as compar the administr file on group busi to the social secur file to
determin if the compani is pai out monthli payment on peopl who have pass awai
electron confirm
mail disburs in forc or laps premium chang of address etc to verifi that
compani record agre with policyhold record
except or manual overrid report
computer report that list all except to normal electron process all human
intervent can appear on a period manag inform report and be testcheck
by manag it is imper that manag review on an ongo basi all except
report for possibl fraud
worker compens fraud
worker compens law requir employ or their insur plan to reimburs an
employe or on hi behalf for injuri that occur on the job regardless of who is at fault
and without delai of legal proceed to determin fault the injuri mai be physic such
as a broken limb or mental such as stress
common scheme
scheme ar gener broken into four categori premium fraud agent fraud claimant
fraud and organ fraud scheme
premium fraud
misrepres inform to the insur by employ to lower the cost of worker
compens premium
employe classif
worker compens rate vari depend on the job classif of an employe
employe that have a higher risk for injuri on the job will have a higher premium rate
cleric employe have a lower probabl for an injuri than for exampl truck driver or
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11115
construct worker and accordingli their premium should be lower therefor to lower
their premium rate an employ might intention misclassifi employe
understat of payrol
the premium for a specif job classif is base on the total payrol for that
classif the employ mai underst the amount of the payrol for higher risk
classif
exampl
two men in massachusett plead guilti to charg of conspiraci and mail fraud in
connect with a fraudul scheme to re duce worker compens claim for a
construct compani the men fals report that worker in highrisk trade were
engag in less danger occup in order to lower premium thei also conceal
million of dollar on the compani payrol from the insur compani therebi avoid
worker compens payment on those dollar
exampl
a bois coupl found themselv respons for a 71049 judgment after be accus of
misreport payrol in their drywal busi two former employe tip off investig
that thei were be paid with check bear differ compani name
half of their payrol monei wa paid by an insur drywal compani and the other half
came from on that wa not insur worker compens claim came from the
compani that wa pai premium
geograph locat of the insur oper
premium rate differ significantli base on geograph locat from state to state an
employ might have a storefront locat or a po box in a state that ha lower rate a
multist employ mai list all of it employe as oper in the state that ha the lowest
rate
histori of past loss
the modif or mod factor is a multipli that is us to determin premium rate
the multipli is deriv by compar the employ claim histori with other employ
claim histori in the same industri the higher the claim loss the higher the mod and
thu the higher the premium a new busi will start with a neutral mod for that type of
insur fraud financi transact
11116 2011 fraud examin manual
busi employ that have a high mod factor mai becom a new busi that doe
not have a mod establish and thu have lower premium than it should
corpor gerrymand
the risk pool assign to an employ will accept ani busi no matter what the claim
experi is howev it doe not have to accept ani employ that ow premium some
employ will creat a new corpor entiti in order to obtain coverag or to avoid higher
premium due to past heavi loss
exampl
fireman fund insur wa award a 15 million judgment against a hollywood
entertain compani in a suit involv a worker compens fraud scheme the
entertain compani set up a shell corpor to pose as a startup product compani
need insur the ruse allow the compani to get worker compens at much
lower rate than if fireman fund had known who thei were actual insur the
entertain compani then manipul the coverag to other film in which it had an
interest again at significantli lower rate
forg document
some employ will forg or alter prior certif show coverag in order to collect
payment for work done or as proof of coverag to author
agent fraud
pocket premium
agent issu certif of coverag indic the custom is insur but never forward
the premium to the insur compani
conspir to reduc premium
agent mai alter the applic for coverag complet by the employ in order to be abl
to offer a lower premium to hi client
the agent mai also improperli advis the employ as to how to complet the applic
the agent mai also advis the employ to transfer a group of employe into a lower risk
classif to avoid the experi modifi
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11117
while the employ mai not be awar that the scheme ar a violat of law sinc the
employ sign the applic he can be charg for hi part in the scheme howev
unknow
claimant fraud
misrepres the circumst of ani injuri or fabric that an injuri occur
injuri fraud
in thi type of fraud fals inform about the injur worker is submit to the worker
compens carrier the report describ the injuri and state the employe is either total
or partial disabl and either unabl to work or onli abl to work parttim in mani of
these scheme the fraud is help along by a doctor who for a fee will provid a fals
diagnosi and fals medic record for phoni treatment
the employe mai stage an accid and fabric an injuri or actual have an accid and
then exagger the injuri
exampl
a former personnel supervisor for the citi of lo angel wa charg with embezzl
fund from the citi worker compens system it wa charg that she provid
inform to a doctor that enabl him to submit almost 500000 in fake claim for
medic servic that were supposedli provid to citi employe the supervisor wa also
alleg to have work on her own alter the computer personnel record and then
author payment of 300000 in bogu disa biliti claim to her friend and rel
exampl
a firefight in washington wa arrest for insur fraud relat to worker
compens payment he had receiv the man claim he fell off a ladder and injur
hi knee while work as a meat cutter in a groceri store he collect temporari disabl
benefit and receiv medic treatment for six month complain of pain and tell
doctor that he could bare walk at the same time the man wa train with hi citi fire
depart as a reserv firefight the train consist of strenuou exercis such as
heavi lift and an hour of physic train each dai
insur fraud financi transact
11118 2011 fraud examin manual
secondari employ
employe who ar collect worker compens benefit mai also secur a job with
anoth employ either parttim or fulltim the employe mai fake hi ident or
assum someon els ident to receiv compens
organ fraud
organ fraud scheme ar compos of the unit effort of a lawyer a capper a doctor
and the claimant thi scheme is us not onli in worker compens case but also in
other medic fraud such as automobil injuri
the lawyer
lawyer ar usual the organ of the scheme and the on who will profit the most
the major of worker compens case ar accept on a conting fee basi if no
settlement is award then the lawyer will not be paid thi is a high volum busi and
the lawyer do not want the case to be litig thei ar reli on the insur
compani desir to settl as quickli as possibl
the lawyer will entic the claimant into secur their servic by promis a larg
settlement from the insur compani the claimant mai or mai not have to undergo the
medic test sinc the onli requir of the claimant is that thei be insur the lawyer
will then refer the injur parti to a doctor for treatment
the capper
capper also known as runner or steerer ar us to recruit patient for the scheme thei
mai be emploi by either the attornei or doctor and ar paid either on a percentag of the
total take or on a per person basi for bring in patient capper mai approach patient
at unemploy compens line work site scene of accid or at ani other type
of organ gather with promis of enrich patient ar brought into the scheme
exampl
in august of 2010 the last member of a group of 51 suspect in miami florida wa
arrest for insur fraud and other crime the insur fraud includ clinic worker
and owner who hire runner to recruit auto accid victim as well as stage auto
accid particip when thei ran out of legitim accid victim runner receiv
500 to 700 per patient and the estim fraudul claim from thi scheme exceed
4 million
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11119
the doctor
doctor mai be organ or player in the scheme but must be a part of it in order for it
to work properli doctor ar us to lend authent to the scheme and thei ar well
compens for their effort the doctor bill for servic that thei mai or mai not render
as well as for unnecessari servic in addit if patient have regular health insur
doctor mai doubl bill for the servic if an injuri is the result of an automobil accid
that occur while the patient wa on the job the doctor mai bill all three insur
compani the worker compens carrier the employe health insur and the
automobil carrier
becaus of coordin of benefit claus in most insur contract the insur
compani will coordin the benefit to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be
100 percent of the injuri howev the doctor will not let the patient health insur
compani know that the injuri is workrel or accidentrel and thu the claim mai be
overpaid sinc both claim ar paid at their full liabil
most of the treatment render will be offic visit xrai vascular studi physic therapi
and spinal manipul in some case hospit employe will be part of the scheme and
allow the us of the facil fraudul
red flag
document that have obvious been alter whiteout or erasur is evid
document that ar improperli fill out with entri in the wrong place or inform
that doesnt make sens
claim file where the carrier indic no record of coverag
poor qualiti photocopi of document that should be origin document
small payrol for larg contractor or employe leas oper
payrol figur report to insur that disagre with payrol report for other
purpos
claim for employe injuri inconsist with that employe classif
industri or construct enterpris with a work forc report to be in lowrat
categori
new corpor on ongo job
most of the employe from an employ with a high experi suddenli becom
employe in a new busi
agenc emploi larg number of support staff and onli ha on licens agent
insur fraud financi transact
11120 2011 fraud examin manual
the agent onli accept cash or monei order for premium
no polici is receiv after an extend time
no bill is receiv for premium
employ review of the applic indic that it is inaccur
the reclassif of the individu employe into a lower classif
the employ begin to declar a smaller payrol
claimant that have or ar
disgruntl soontoretir or face disciplinari action or layoff
involv in season work that is about to end
taken unexplain or excess time off prior to claim injuri
taken more time off than the claim injuri seem to warrant
no wit to the accid
accid that occur in an area where the employe normal would not be
work especi if it a highrisk area
delai the report of an accid
new on the job or have a histori of shortterm employ
a histori of injuri
inappropri or lack of medic treatment for injuri
experienc financi difficulti
chang physician when a work releas ha been issu
frequent chang medic provid
demand for quick or earli settlement
never at home after a seriou injuri or can onli be reach by return
telephon call
unusu familiar with worker compens procedur
consist uncoop
receiv mail at a post offic box or at an address differ from employ or
depart of motor vehicl
soft tissu injuri that ar hard to prove
incapacit but seen in activ that requir full mobil
independ medic exam that reveal conflict medic inform
a histori of self or famili employ have a trade or work in a cash busi
injuri that occur in an area where the employe would normal not be work
injuri that would not normal be the type the employe should have
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11121
injuri that occur on a late fridai afternoon or ar report on a mondai morn
if injuri ar report mondai morn the injuri could have result over
the weekend
activ involv in contact sport or physic demand hobbi
date of disabl or absenc from work that doe not coincid with the physician
date of disabl or date of treatment
unprofession diagnost terminolog
misspel medic terminolog throughout the medic report or hospit record
a pattern of accid claim by an individu or famili member
claimant that repeatedli doesnt show up for hi request independ physic
examin or is not home when the regularli schedul nurs stop by for therapi
the claimant attornei is known for handl suspici claim
attornei report hi represent began on the dai of the report incid
same doctor and attornei ar known to handl these type of case
claimant complain to the insur compani ceo in order to press for payment
the attornei threaten further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made
the attornei inquir about a settlement earli into the life of the claim
wholesal claim handl by law firm and multipl class action suit
date of the accid ar vagu or contradictori
treatment for the injuri follow previou firsttim visit to a provid
same provid alwai bill for extra time or extra consider on a claim
provid is work through an attornei
provid is reluct to commun with the insur compani
provid share the same patient with the same colleagu
provid refer patient to specif other provid
provid prescrib unnecessari suppli andor care by a specif provid
medic record ar can
medic record ar out of sequenc and miss date of servic
differ handwrit with same date of servic
lost burn or stolen record when request
progress note consist reflect that the patient ha a high degre of pain yet hi
condit is improv or progress as plan
inconsist diagnosi for the treatment render
provid bill on a holidai or sundai
conflict medic report
claim ar photocopi
insur fraud financi transact
11122 2011 fraud examin manual
claim for other patient ar ident
bill or harass the insur compani for payment
claimant address is differ on the claim form than it is on the enrol file
premium fraud investig tip
review the applic for coverag for complet and accuraci
if the busi is claim to be new then it should be verifi that it is inde new and
no mod factor have been establish
review the underwrit of the applic for suspici activ if the compani is a
larg compani and ha a small payrol verifi the number of employe as well as their
classif
review claim to determin if thei ar consist with the type of employ report
and the number of employe claim
conduct an onsit audit of their payrol and relat record for the polici period as well
as to determin where their princip place of employ is locat
observ if there ar too mani cleric employe or other low risk occup that
make up the calcul lead you to believ that the record ar misstat
analyz the financi statement when avail to determin what payrol expens
actual ar compar to what is report
review accid and injuri report for suspici activ
conduct surveil as need to observ and document variou activ
document find and report the result of the activ as requir
claimant fraud investig tip
in spite of the possibl indic of fraud medic treatment must be secur
immedi but an investig should be open immedi if there is a suspicion of
fraud
the manag who is respons for the area where the injuri occur should initi an
investig on each report accid
as soon as possibl the accid should be discuss with the employe
obtain a sign statement from the employe as soon as the employe is abl to do so
in obtain a sign statement the follow question should be answer as
applic
what wa the employe do just prior to the accid and after the accid
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11123
wa the employe carri out hi regular duti and in the manner thei should
normal be conduct
had the employe been properli instruct as to how to safe perform the duti
when and by whom
did thei work in accord with these instruct
did anoth employe caus the injuri
wa the equip or machineri properli guard and in good condit
wa the equip suit for the purpos it wa be us
wa the workplac properli light
what were the housekeep condit in the area
doe the work be done by the injur employe differ in ani wai from that be
perform by other employe
is there a safer wai that hi oper can be perform
wa the injur employe in good health when he report to work on the date of
the accid
have an independ medic examin perform to document the ill the person
perform the exam should photograph the patient obtain a copi of the patient photo
identif such as a driver licens and obtain the patient signatur
the follow question should be ask
ar you disabl from work
ar you now work parttim fulltim or not at all
what ar your daili activ
what is your activ level with regard to your abil to walk jog run drive swim or
particip in sport activ or hobbi
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11201
