2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Agent/Broker Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Agent/Broker Fraud 
 
Cash, Loan, and Dividend Checks 
A company employee without the knowledge of an insured or contract holder requests cash, 
a loan, or a dividend check, and either deposits the check into his bank account or into a 
fictitious account. The employee, in order to minimize his chances of being detected 
committing a fraudulent act, might change the company policyholder’s address of record to 
either his address or a fictitious address. Once the check is issued, the address is then 
changed back to the previous address. 
 
Settlement Checks 
Company employees can misdirect settlement checks such as Matured Endowment, Paid 
Up, etc., to the branch office, to their homes, or to fictitious addresses. The employee can 
easily create a check defalcation by changing the address of record prior to the settlement 
check issue date, thus misdirecting the check in question. Also, periodically an orphan 
contract holder might be transferred to his agency affording the opportunity to improperly 
request the issuance of a settlement check. 
 
An orphan contract holder is a policyholder or contract holder who has not been assigned to a 
servicing agent or the whereabouts of this individual is unknown. The servicing agent 
attempts to locate this family group and can possibly influence them to purchase  
additional insurance. 
 
A clerical support employee might receive notification that the orphan contract holder does 
not reside at the given address. This will give the support staffer an opportunity to change 
the address to either his home or a fictitious address and possibly create a fraud. 
 
Premium Fraud 
An agent collects the premium, but doesn’t re mit the check to the insurance company. The 
insured has no coverage. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1103 
Fictitious Payees 
An agent or a clerk can change the beneficiary of record to a fictitious person and 
subsequently submit the necessary papers to authorize the issuance of a check. 
 
Fictitious Death Claims 
An agent or employee obtains a fictitious death certificate and requests that a death claim 
check be issued. The agent receives the check and cashes it. 
 
The sales representative can also write a fictitious application and, after the contestable 
period (two years), submit a phony death claim form and obtain the proceeds. The agent, by 
investing a couple of thousand dollars, could receive $50,000 or more in misappropriated 
claims.  
 
A company is particularly vulnerable to this scheme if the perpetrator has knowledge of the 
underwriting procedures such as the limits under which insurance can be written without a 
medical exam and what should be submitted on a death claim. 
 
 



:


agentbrok fraud
cash loan and dividend check
a compani employe without the knowledg of an insur or contract holder request cash
a loan or a dividend check and either deposit the check into hi bank account or into a
fictiti account the employe in order to minim hi chanc of be detect
commit a fraudul act might chang the compani policyhold address of record to
either hi address or a fictiti address onc the check is issu the address is then
chang back to the previou address
settlement check
compani employe can misdirect settlement check such as matur endow paid
up etc to the branch offic to their home or to fictiti address the employe can
easili creat a check defalc by chang the address of record prior to the settlement
check issu date thu misdirect the check in question also period an orphan
contract holder might be transfer to hi agenc afford the opportun to improperli
request the issuanc of a settlement check
an orphan contract holder is a policyhold or contract holder who ha not been assign to a
servic agent or the whereabout of thi individu is unknown the servic agent
attempt to locat thi famili group and can possibl influenc them to purchas
addit insur
a cleric support employe might receiv notif that the orphan contract holder doe
not resid at the given address thi will give the support staffer an opportun to chang
the address to either hi home or a fictiti address and possibl creat a fraud
premium fraud
an agent collect the premium but doesnt re mit the check to the insur compani the
insur ha no coverag
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11103
fictiti paye
an agent or a clerk can chang the beneficiari of record to a fictiti person and
subsequ submit the necessari paper to author the issuanc of a check
fictiti death claim
an agent or employe obtain a fictiti death certif and request that a death claim
check be issu the agent receiv the check and cash it
the sale repres can also write a fictiti applic and after the contest
period two year submit a phoni death claim form and obtain the proce the agent by
invest a coupl of thousand dollar could receiv 50000 or more in misappropri
claim
a compani is particularli vulner to thi scheme if the perpetr ha knowledg of the
underwrit procedur such as the limit under which insur can be written without a
medic exam and what should be submit on a death claim
