2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Underwriting Irregularities


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Underwriting Irregularities 
 
Equity Funding 
Equity funding is the process of using existing premium/policy values to finance new 
businesses. So long as the insured is aware of what is being done by the agent and fully 
understands the long-range method of payment on the new contract, there is no apparent 
underwriting irregularity. 
 
Equity funding techniques, also known as piggybacking, usually do not produce quality 
business. Furthermore, the company increases the amount of life insurance on the books but 
receives little or no new funds while incurring increased sales and administrative expenses 
associated with the issue of that new business. 
 
Each jurisdiction has its own requirements on piggybacking as it relates to replacement 
insurance. Companies must comply with these regulations to prevent being fined or the 
possibility that the company’s insurance license can be suspended or taken away for 
noncompliance. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1104                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Equity funding irregularities might involve improper financial benefits to field personnel as 
well as annual incentive compensation bonuses paid to management if applicable. The fraud 
examiner should determine what financial benefit will occur from an improper equity 
transaction. 
 
Misrepresentation 
Misrepresentation might occur if a sales representative makes a false statement with the 
intent to deceive the prospective insureds in order to knowingly obtain an unlawful gain.  
 
False Information 
A company employee might submit the following false information to obtain unlawful 
financial gain: 
• Improper medical information to obtain a better insurable rate for the prospective 
policyholder (for example, standard to preferred rate). 
• Improper date of birth to obtain a cheaper premium on the new policy. 
• Improper home address to obtain a cheaper premium for home or automobile 
insurance. 
• Improper driving history prior to purchasing automobile insurance to reduce the annual 
premium or obtain insurance where normally the individual would have to apply through 
the risk pool. 
 
Fictitious Policies 
A salesman, in order to keep his position, submits fictitious policies to improve his writing 
record. Also prior to an individual leaving the company he writes fictitious policies called 
tombstone cases to improve his commission pool so that his compensation will be greater. 
Tombstone means an agent literally takes names from tombstones in a cemetery and writes 
new policies.  
 
Surety and Performance Bond Schemes 
Surety and performance bonds guarantee that certain events will or will not occur. An agent 
issues worthless bonds to the insured for high-risk coverage in hopes that a claim is never 
made. If a claim is made, the agent might pay it off from agency funds, delay the payment, or 
skip town. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1105 
Sliding 
Sliding is the term used for including additional coverages in the insurance policy without the 
knowledge of the insured. The extra charges are hidden in the total premium and since the 
insured is unaware of the coverage, few claims are ever filed. For example, motor club 
memberships, accidental death, and travel accident coverages can usually be slipped into the 
policy without the knowledge of the insured. 
 
Twisting 
Twisting is the replacement, usually by high-pressure sales techniques, of existing policies for 
new ones. The primary reason, of course, is for the agent to profit since first year sales 
commissions are much higher than commissions for existing policies. 
 
Churning 
Churning occurs when agents falsely tell customers that they can buy additional insurance for 
nothing by using built-up value in their current policies. In reality, the cost of the new 
policies frequently exceeds the value of the old ones.  
 
 



:


underwrit irregular
equiti fund
equiti fund is the process of us exist premiumpolici valu to financ new
busi so long as the insur is awar of what is be done by the agent and fulli
understand the longrang method of payment on the new contract there is no appar
underwrit irregular
equiti fund techniqu also known as piggyback usual do not produc qualiti
busi furthermor the compani increas the amount of life insur on the book but
receiv littl or no new fund while incur increas sale and administr expens
associ with the issu of that new busi
each jurisdict ha it own requir on piggyback as it relat to replac
insur compani must compli with these regul to prevent be fine or the
possibl that the compani insur licens can be suspend or taken awai for
noncompli
insur fraud financi transact
11104 2011 fraud examin manual
equiti fund irregular might involv improp financi benefit to field personnel as
well as annual incent compens bonus paid to manag if applic the fraud
examin should determin what financi benefit will occur from an improp equiti
transact
misrepresent
misrepresent might occur if a sale repres make a fals statement with the
intent to deceiv the prospect insur in order to knowingli obtain an unlaw gain
fals inform
a compani employe might submit the follow fals inform to obtain unlaw
financi gain
improp medic inform to obtain a better insur rate for the prospect
policyhold for exampl standard to prefer rate
improp date of birth to obtain a cheaper premium on the new polici
improp home address to obtain a cheaper premium for home or automobil
insur
improp drive histori prior to purchas automobil insur to reduc the annual
premium or obtain insur where normal the individu would have to appli through
the risk pool
fictiti polici
a salesman in order to keep hi posit submit fictiti polici to improv hi write
record also prior to an individu leav the compani he write fictiti polici call
tombston case to improv hi commiss pool so that hi compens will be greater
tombston mean an agent liter take name from tombston in a cemeteri and write
new polici
sureti and perform bond scheme
sureti and perform bond guarante that certain event will or will not occur an agent
issu worthless bond to the insur for highrisk coverag in hope that a claim is never
made if a claim is made the agent might pai it off from agenc fund delai the payment or
skip town
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11105
slide
slide is the term us for includ addit coverag in the insur polici without the
knowledg of the insur the extra charg ar hidden in the total premium and sinc the
insur is unawar of the coverag few claim ar ever file for exampl motor club
membership accident death and travel accid coverag can usual be slip into the
polici without the knowledg of the insur
twist
twist is the replac usual by highpressur sale techniqu of exist polici for
new on the primari reason of cours is for the agent to profit sinc first year sale
commiss ar much higher than commiss for exist polici
churn
churn occur when agent fals tell custom that thei can bui addit insur for
noth by us builtup valu in their current polici in realiti the cost of the new
polici frequent exce the valu of the old on
