2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Vehicle Insurance Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Vehicle Insurance Schemes 
 
Ditching 
Ditching, also known as owner give-ups, is getting rid of a vehicle to cash in on an insurance 
policy or to settle an outstanding loan. The vehicle is normally expensive and purchased with 
a small down payment. The vehicle is reported stolen, although in some cases, the owner just 
abandons the vehicle hoping that it is stolen, stripped for parts, or taken to a pound and 
destroyed. The scheme sometimes involves homeowner’s insurance for the property that 
was “stolen” in the vehicle. 
 
Past Posting 
Past posting is a scheme in which a person becomes involved in an automobile accident, but 
doesn’t have insurance. The person gets insurance,  waits a little bit of time, and then reports 
the vehicle as being in an accident, thus collecting for the damages. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1106                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Vehicle Repair 
This scheme involves the billing of new parts on a vehicle when used parts were actually 
replaced in the vehicle. Sometimes this involves collusion between the adjuster and the body 
repair shop. 
 
Vehicle Smuggling 
This is a scheme that involves the purchase of a new vehicle with maximum financing. A 
counterfeit certificate of the vehicle’s title is made showing that it is free and clear. The 
vehicle is insured to the maximum, with minimum deductible theft coverage. It is then 
shipped to a foreign port and reported stolen. The car is sold at its new location and 
insurance is also collected for the “theft.” 
 
Phantom Vehicles 
The certificate of title is a document that shows the legal ownership of a vehicle. Even 
though it is not absolute proof that a vehicle exists, it is the basis for the issuance of 
insurance policies. Collecting on a phantom vehicle has been shown to be easy to do. 
 
30-Day Special 
In this scheme, the vehicle’s owner reports the vehicle stolen and hides it just long enough 
for the insurance company to settle the claim—usually 30 days. Once the claim is paid, the 
vehicle is abandoned by the owner. 
 
Paper Accident 
This scheme involves the invention of an auto accident that only exists on paper. When the 
repair costs are less than $1000, many insurance companies don’t bother to send an 
investigator to examine the vehicle. Because this is a low-risk endeavor, and no police are 
involved, this scheme is very popular within organized crime rings.  
 
Hit and Run 
The hit and run is a variation of the paper accident. The owner of a previously damaged 
vehicle calls the police and claims to be the victim of a hit and run accident. The resulting 
police report is used to file an insurance claim. This scheme may also be perpetrated after a 
single-car accident with no witnesses.  
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1107 
Staged Accidents 
Staged accidents are schemes in which an accident is predetermined to occur on a vehicle. 
The schemes are organized by rings and the culprits move from one area to another. They 
often use the same vehicle over and over, which sometimes causes their scheme to  
be uncovered. 
 
Two Vehicle Accident 
Perpetrators cause an accident and then lead the innocent driver to believe it’s his fault. 
 
Three or More Vehicle Accident 
Perpetrators set up an accident in which all the drivers are involved. 
 
Side Swipe 
The side swipe is a scheme that relies on opportunity. In a busy intersection with multiple 
left-turn lanes, the perpetrator makes the left turn over and over again, waiting for a driver to 
cross into his lane. When a driver finally does, the perpetrator purposely drives into the 
other car. Witnesses and police involvement are helpful to the perpetrator in this case. 
 
Drive Down 
The scheme involves a perpetrator waving on a driver attempting to merge in front of him, 
then intentionally colliding with the merging vehicle. After the accident, the perpetrator 
denies having waved on the merging driver. 
 
Other Staged Accidents 
Two drivers purposely collide where they will not be observed. Additional damage may be 
added to the vehicles after impact. The cars are then driven to a road or highway and 
arranged so that the accident appears to have occurred there. The police are then notified. 
 
SWOOP AND SQUAT 
A victim of this scheme will find himself passed by two cars while driving. The car in the 
lead will cut in front of the second, forcing it to stop abruptly. The victim rear-ends the 
second car while the other driver speeds away. Victims usually accept responsibility for the 
accident, thinking it their fault for not paying attention. The rear-ended vehicle usually 
contains the maximum amount of passengers, all with injuries. 
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1108                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inflated Damages 
The business environment and competition for work in the automobile repair industry have 
motivated a scheme where some establishments inflate the estimated cost to cover the 
deductible. The insured is advised by the repair shop that the shop will accept whatever the 
company authorizes. 
 
Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) Switch  
VIN-switch fraud schemes are the work of professionals in which a wrecked vehicle is sold 
and reported as being repaired. The vehicle is not repaired, but the VIN plate is switched 
with a stolen vehicle of the same make and model.  
 
Rental Car Fraud 
A person doesn’t need to own a vehicle to incur automobile fraud. There are several 
schemes that can be perpetrated using rental cars. The most prevalent involve property 
damage, bodily injury, and export fraud. 
 
 



:


vehicl insur scheme
ditch
ditch also known as owner giveup is get rid of a vehicl to cash in on an insur
polici or to settl an outstand loan the vehicl is normal expens and purchas with
a small down payment the vehicl is report stolen although in some case the owner just
abandon the vehicl hope that it is stolen strip for part or taken to a pound and
destroi the scheme sometim involv homeown insur for the properti that
wa stolen in the vehicl
past post
past post is a scheme in which a person becom involv in an automobil accid but
doesnt have insur the person get insur wait a littl bit of time and then report
the vehicl as be in an accid thu collect for the damag
insur fraud financi transact
11106 2011 fraud examin manual
vehicl repair
thi scheme involv the bill of new part on a vehicl when us part were actual
replac in the vehicl sometim thi involv collus between the adjust and the bodi
repair shop
vehicl smuggl
thi is a scheme that involv the purchas of a new vehicl with maximum financ a
counterfeit certif of the vehicl titl is made show that it is free and clear the
vehicl is insur to the maximum with minimum deduct theft coverag it is then
ship to a foreign port and report stolen the car is sold at it new locat and
insur is also collect for the theft
phantom vehicl
the certif of titl is a document that show the legal ownership of a vehicl even
though it is not absolut proof that a vehicl exist it is the basi for the issuanc of
insur polici collect on a phantom vehicl ha been shown to be easi to do
30dai special
in thi scheme the vehicl owner report the vehicl stolen and hide it just long enough
for the insur compani to settl the claimusu 30 dai onc the claim is paid the
vehicl is abandon by the owner
paper accid
thi scheme involv the invent of an auto accid that onli exist on paper when the
repair cost ar less than 1000 mani insur compani dont bother to send an
investig to examin the vehicl becaus thi is a lowrisk endeavor and no polic ar
involv thi scheme is veri popular within organ crime ring
hit and run
the hit and run is a variat of the paper accid the owner of a previous damag
vehicl call the polic and claim to be the victim of a hit and run accid the result
polic report is us to file an insur claim thi scheme mai also be perpetr after a
singlecar accid with no wit
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11107
stage accid
stage accid ar scheme in which an accid is predetermin to occur on a vehicl
the scheme ar organ by ring and the culprit move from on area to anoth thei
often us the same vehicl over and over which sometim caus their scheme to
be uncov
two vehicl accid
perpetr caus an accid and then lead the innoc driver to believ it hi fault
three or more vehicl accid
perpetr set up an accid in which all the driver ar involv
side swipe
the side swipe is a scheme that reli on opportun in a busi intersect with multipl
leftturn lane the perpetr make the left turn over and over again wait for a driver to
cross into hi lane when a driver final doe the perpetr purpos drive into the
other car wit and polic involv ar help to the perpetr in thi case
drive down
the scheme involv a perpetr wave on a driver attempt to merg in front of him
then intention collid with the merg vehicl after the accid the perpetr
deni have wave on the merg driver
other stage accid
two driver purpos collid where thei will not be observ addit damag mai be
ad to the vehicl after impact the car ar then driven to a road or highwai and
arrang so that the accid appear to have occur there the polic ar then notifi
swoop and squat
a victim of thi scheme will find himself pass by two car while drive the car in the
lead will cut in front of the second forc it to stop abruptli the victim rearend the
second car while the other driver speed awai victim usual accept respons for the
accid think it their fault for not pai attent the rearend vehicl usual
contain the maximum amount of passeng all with injuri
insur fraud financi transact
11108 2011 fraud examin manual
inflat damag
the busi environ and competit for work in the automobil repair industri have
motiv a scheme where some establish inflat the estim cost to cover the
deduct the insur is advis by the repair shop that the shop will accept whatev the
compani author
vehicl identif number vin switch
vinswitch fraud scheme ar the work of profession in which a wreck vehicl is sold
and report as be repair the vehicl is not repair but the vin plate is switch
with a stolen vehicl of the same make and model
rental car fraud
a person doesnt need to own a vehicl to incur automobil fraud there ar sever
scheme that can be perpetr us rental car the most preval involv properti
damag bodili injuri and export fraud
