2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Property Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Property Schemes 
Property schemes usually involve the filing of insurance claims for property that never 
existed or for inflated loss amounts. 
 
Inflated Inventory 
Property that is lost through fire is claimed on an insurance form. However, property that 
doesn’t exist also finds its way onto an inventory of the property clai med. Property claimed 
might have been previously sold or never owned by the claimant. 
 
Phony or Inflated Thefts 
A home or car that has been burglarized is the basis for filing a claim for recoveries of 
monies lost. However, as with items “destroyed” by fire above, the items never existed or 
were previously sold. 
 
Paper Boats 
A claim is filed for a boat that sank, but actually never existed. It is not difficult to register a 
boat that is based on a bill of sale. After a period of time, a loss is claimed for the sinking of 
the boat. It is difficult to prove that the boat didn’t exist or wasn’t sunk intentionally. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1109 



:


properti scheme
properti scheme usual involv the file of insur claim for properti that never
exist or for inflat loss amount
inflat inventori
properti that is lost through fire is claim on an insur form howev properti that
doesnt exist also find it wai onto an inventori of the properti clai med properti claim
might have been previous sold or never own by the claimant
phoni or inflat theft
a home or car that ha been burglar is the basi for file a claim for recoveri of
moni lost howev as with item destroi by fire abov the item never exist or
were previous sold
paper boat
a claim is file for a boat that sank but actual never exist it is not difficult to regist a
boat that is base on a bill of sale after a period of time a loss is claim for the sink of
the boat it is difficult to prove that the boat didnt exist or wasnt sunk intention
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11109
