2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Life Insurance Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Life Insurance Schemes 
 
Fraudulent Death Claims 
To obtain reimbursement for life insurance, a death certificate is required. However, phony 
death certificates are not that difficult to obtain. The person might be very much alive and 
missing or the person might be dead, and the death is past posted. With small settlements, 
death claims are not closely scrutinized and paid relatively easily. 
 
Murder for Profit 
This scheme involves the killing (or arranging for the killing) of a person in order to collect 
the insurance. The death might be made to look like it was an accident or a random killing. 
 
Vanishing Premium Scheme 
This scheme involves insurance companies marketing deceptive “vanishing premium” life 
insurance policies. The idea of the “vanishing premium” policy is that, after a set number of 
years of paying the policy’s premium, the policy would be paid off. At that point the policy 
holder would not have to make any more payments toward the policy. 
 
In reality, though, around the time the policy would be paid off, the insurance company 
would explain that the policy had been revised, and that several more years of payments 
would be necessary. The policy holder would then be faced with a dilemma: either cease 
making payments and risk having the policy lapse due to non-payment, or continue making 
the expensive payments for several more years. 
 
 



:


life insur scheme
fraudul death claim
to obtain reimburs for life insur a death certif is requir howev phoni
death certif ar not that difficult to obtain the person might be veri much aliv and
miss or the person might be dead and the death is past post with small settlement
death claim ar not close scrutin and paid rel easili
murder for profit
thi scheme involv the kill or arrang for the kill of a person in order to collect
the insur the death might be made to look like it wa an accid or a random kill
vanish premium scheme
thi scheme involv insur compani market decept vanish premium life
insur polici the idea of the vanish premium polici is that after a set number of
year of pai the polici premium the polici would be paid off at that point the polici
holder would not have to make ani more payment toward the polici
in realiti though around the time the polici would be paid off the insur compani
would explain that the polici had been revis and that sever more year of payment
would be necessari the polici holder would then be face with a dilemma either ceas
make payment and risk have the polici laps due to nonpay or continu make
the expens payment for sever more year
