2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Workers' Compensation Fraud 
Workers' compensation laws require employers or their insurance plan to reimburse an 
employee (or on his behalf) for injuries that occurred on the job regardless of who is at fault 
and without delay of legal proceedings to determine fault. The injury may be physical, such 
as a broken limb, or mental, such as stress. 
 
Common Schemes 
Schemes are generally broken into four categories: premium fraud, agent fraud, claimant 
fraud, and organized fraud schemes. 
 
Premium Fraud  
Misrepresenting information to the insurer by employers to lower the cost of workers’ 
compensation premiums. 
 
EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION 
Workers’ compensation rates vary depending on the job classification of an employee. 
Employees that have a higher risk for injury on the job will have a higher premium rate. 
Clerical employees have a lower probability for an injury than, for example, truck drivers or 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1115 
construction workers, and accordingly their premiums should be lower. Therefore to lower 
their premium rate, an employer might intentionally misclassify employees. 
 
UNDERSTATEMENT OF PAYROLL 
The premium for a specific job classification is based on the total payroll for that 
classification. The employer may understate the amount of the payroll for higher risk 
classifications. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Two men in Massachusetts pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy and mail fraud in 
connection with a fraudulent scheme to re duce workers’ compensation claims for a 
construction company. The men falsely reported that workers in high-risk trades were 
engaged in less dangerous occupations in order to lower premiums. They also concealed 
millions of dollars on the company payroll from the insurance company, thereby avoiding 
workers’ compensation payments on those dollars. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Boise couple found themselves responsible for a $71,049 judgment after being accused of 
misreporting payroll in their drywall business. Two former employees tipped off investigators 
that they were being paid with checks bearing different company names. 
 
Half of their payroll money was paid by an insured drywall company, and the other half 
came from one that was not insured. Workers’ compensation claims came from the 
company that was paying premiums.  
 
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION OF THE INSURED’S OPERATION 
Premium rates differ significantly based on geographic location from state to state. An 
employer might have a storefront location or a P.O. box in a state that has lower rates. A 
multistate employer may list all of its employees as operating in the state that has the lowest 
rates. 
 
HISTORY OF PAST LOSSES 
The modification or “mod” factor is a multiplier that is used to determine premium rates. 
The multiplier is derived by comparing the employer’s claims history with other employers’ 
claims histories in the same industry. The higher the claims loss, the higher the mod, and 
thus the higher the premium. A new business will start with a neutral mod for that type of 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1116                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. Employers that have a high mod factor may become a “new” business that does 
not have a mod established and thus have lower premiums than it should.  
 
CORPORATE GERRYMANDERING 
The risk pool assigned to an employer will accept any business no matter what the claim 
experience is. However, it does not have to accept any employer that owes premiums. Some 
employers will create a new corporate entity in order to obtain coverage or to avoid higher 
premiums due to past heavy losses. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fireman’s Fund Insurance was awarded a $15 million judgment against a Hollywood 
entertainment company in a suit involving a workers’ compensation fraud scheme. The 
entertainment company set up a shell corporation to pose as a start-up production company 
needing insurance. The ruse allowed the company to get workers’ compensation at much 
lower rates than if Fireman’s Fund had known who they were actually insuring. The 
entertainment company then manipulated the coverage to other films in which it had an 
interest, again at significantly lower rates.  
 
FORGED DOCUMENTS 
Some employers will forge or alter prior certificates showing coverages in order to collect 
payment for work done or as proof of coverages to authorities. 
 
Agent Fraud  
POCKETING PREMIUMS 
Agents issue certificates of coverage indicating the customer is insured, but never forward 
the premium to the insurance company.  
 
CONSPIRING TO REDUCE PREMIUMS 
Agents may alter the application for coverage completed by the employer in order to be able 
to offer a lower premium to his client.  
 
The agent may also improperly advise the employer as to how to complete the application.  
 
The agent may also advise the employer to transfer a group of employees into a lower risk 
classification to avoid the experience modifier. 
 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1117 
While the employer may not be aware that the schemes are a violation of law, since the 
employer signs the application, he can be charged for his part in the scheme however 
unknowing. 
 
Claimant Fraud 
Misrepresenting the circumstances of any injury or fabricating that an injury occurred. 
 
INJURY FRAUD 
In this type of fraud, false information about the injured worker is submitted to the workers’ 
compensation carrier. The report describes the injury and states the employee is either totally 
or partially disabled and either unable to work or only able to work part-time. In many of 
these schemes the fraud is helped along by a doctor who, for a fee, will provide a false 
diagnosis and false medical records for phony treatments. 
 
The employee may stage an accident and fabricate an injury, or actually have an accident, and 
then exaggerate the injury.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A former personnel supervisor for the city of Los Angeles was charged with embezzling 
funds from the city’s workers’ compensation  system. It was charged that she provided 
information to a doctor that enabled him to submit almost $500,000 in fake claims for 
medical services that were supposedly provided  to city employees. The supervisor was also 
alleged to have, working on her own, altered the computerized personnel records and then 
authorized payment of $300,000 in bogus disa bility claims to her friends and relatives.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A firefighter in Washington was arrested for insurance fraud related to workers’ 
compensation payments he had received. The man claimed he fell off a ladder and injured 
his knee while working as a meat  cutter in a grocery store. He  collected temporary disability 
benefits and received medical treatment for six months, complaining of pain and telling 
doctors that he could barely walk. At the same time, the man was training with his city fire 
department as a reserve firefighter. The training consisted of strenuous exercise such as 
heavy lifting and an hour of physical training each day.  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1118                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT 
Employees who are collecting workers’ compensation benefits may also secure a job with 
another employer — either part-time or full-time. The employee may fake his identity or 
assume someone else’s identity to receive compensation. 
 
Organized Fraud 
Organized fraud schemes are composed of the united efforts of a lawyer, a capper, a doctor, 
and the claimant. This scheme is used not only in workers’ compensation cases, but also in 
other medical frauds, such as automobile injuries. 
 
THE LAWYER 
Lawyers are usually the organizers of the schemes and the ones who will profit the most. 
The majority of workers’ compensation cases are accepted on a contingency fee basis. If no 
settlement is awarded, then the lawyers will not be paid. This is a high volume business, and 
the lawyers do not want the cases to be litigated. They are relying on the insurance 
company’s desire to settle as quickly as possible.  
 
The lawyers will entice the claimant into securing their services by promising a large 
settlement from the insurance company. The claimants may or may not have to undergo the 
medical tests, since the only requirement of the claimants is that they be insured. The lawyer 
will then refer the injured party to a doctor for “treatment.” 
 
THE CAPPER 
Cappers, also known as runners or steerers, are used to recruit patients for the scheme. They 
may be employed by either the attorney or doctor and are paid, either on a percentage of the 
total take or on a per person basis, for bringing in patients. Cappers may approach patients 
at unemployment compensation lines, work sites, scenes of accidents, or at any other types 
of organized gatherings. With promises of enrichment, patients are brought into the scheme. 
 
EXAMPLE 
In August of 2010, the last member of a group of 51 suspects in Miami, Florida was 
arrested for insurance fraud and other crimes. The insurance fraud included clinic workers 
and owners who hired runners to recruit auto accident victims, as well as staged auto 
accident participants when they ran out of “legitimate” accident victims. Runners received 
$500 to $700 per patient, and the estimated fraudulent claims from this scheme exceeded 
$4 million.   
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1119 
THE DOCTOR 
Doctors may be organizers or players in the scheme, but must be a part of it in order for it 
to work properly. Doctors are used to lend authenticity to the scheme, and they are well 
compensated for their efforts. The doctors bill for services that they may or may not render 
as well as for unnecessary services. In addition, if patients have regular health insurance, 
doctors may double bill for the services. If an injury is the result of an automobile accident 
that occurred while the patient was on the job, the doctor may bill all three insurance 
companies: the workers’ compensation carrier, the employee’s health insurance, and the 
automobile carrier. 
 
Because of coordination of benefit clauses in most insurance contracts, the insurance 
companies will coordinate the benefits to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be 
100 percent of the injuries. However, the doctors will not let the patient’s health insurance 
company know that the injury is work-related or accident-related and thus the claim may be 
overpaid, since both claims are paid at their full liability.  
 
Most of the treatment rendered will be office visits, x-rays, vascular studies, physical therapy, 
and spinal manipulations. In some cases hospital employees will be part of the scheme and 
allow the use of the facility fraudulently.  
 
Red Flags 
• Documents that have obviously been altered; white-out or erasure is evident. 
• Documents that are improperly filled out with entries in the wrong place or information 
that doesn’t make sense. 
• Claims filed where the carrier indicated no record of coverage. 
• Poor quality photocopies of documents that should be original documents. 
• Small payrolls for large contractors or employee leasing operations. 
• Payroll figures reported to insurers that disagree with payroll reported for other 
purposes. 
• Claims for employee injuries inconsistent with that employee’s classification. 
• Industrial or construction enterprises with a work force reported to be in low-rate 
categories. 
• “New” corporations on ongoing jobs. 
• Most of the employees from an employer  with a high experience suddenly become 
employees in a new business. 
• Agency employs large numbers of support staff and only has one licensed agent. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1120                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The agent only accepts cash or money orders for premiums. 
• No policy is received after an extended time. 
• No bill is received for premiums. 
• Employer review of the application indicates that it is inaccurate. 
• The reclassification of the individual employees into a lower classification. 
• The employer begins to declare a smaller payroll. 
• Claimants that have or are: 
? Disgruntled, soon-to-retire, or facing disciplinary action or layoffs. 
? Involved in seasonal work that is about to end. 
? Taken unexplained or excessive time off prior to claimed injury. 
? Taken more time off than the claimed injury seems to warrant. 
? No witnesses to the accident. 
? Accidents that occurred in an area where the employee normally would not be 
working (especially if it’s a high-risk area). 
? Delayed the reporting of an accident. 
? New on the job or have a history of short-term employment. 
? A history of injuries. 
? Inappropriate or lack of medical treatment for injuries. 
? Experiencing financial difficulties. 
? Changed physicians when a work release has been issued. 
? Frequently changed medical providers. 
? Demands for quick or early settlement. 
? Never at home after a “serious” injury or can only be reached by return  
telephone calls. 
? Unusually familiar with workers’ compensation procedures. 
? Consistently uncooperative. 
? Received mail at a post office box or at an address different from employment or 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
? Soft tissue injuries that are hard to prove. 
? Incapacitated, but seen in activities that require full mobility. 
? Independent medical exams that reveal conflicting medical information. 
? A history of self or family employment; have a trade or work in a cash business. 
? Injuries that occur in an area where the employee would normally not be working. 
? Injuries that would not normally be the type the employee should have. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1121 
? Injuries that occur on a late Friday afternoon or are reported on a Monday morning 
(if injuries are reported Monday morning, the injury could have resulted over  
the weekend). 
? Actively involved in contact sports or physically demanding hobbies. 
? Dates of disability or absences from work that does not coincide with the physician’s 
date of disability or dates of treatment. 
? Unprofessional diagnostic terminology. 
? Misspelled medical terminology throughout the medical report or hospital record. 
? A pattern of accident claims by an individual or family members. 
• Claimant that repeatedly doesn’t show up for his requested independent physical 
examinations or is not home when the regularly scheduled nurse stops by for therapy. 
• The claimant’s attorney is known for handling suspicious claims. 
• Attorney reports his representation began on the day of the reported incident. 
• Same doctor and attorney are known to handle these types of cases. 
• Claimant complains to the insurance company’s CEO in order to press for payment. 
• The attorney threatens further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made. 
• The attorney inquires about a settlement early into the life of the claim. 
• Wholesale claim handling by law firms and multiple class action suits. 
• Dates of the accident are vague or contradictory. 
• Treatment for the injury follows previous first-time visits to a provider. 
• Same provider always bills for extra time or extra consideration on a claim. 
• Provider is working through an attorney. 
• Provider is reluctant to communicate with the insurance company. 
• Provider shares the same patients with the same colleagues. 
• Provider refers patients to specific other providers. 
• Provider prescribes unnecessary supplies and/or care by a specific provider. 
• Medical records are “canned.” 
• Medical records are out of sequence and missing dates of service. 
• Different handwriting with same dates of service. 
• Lost, burned, or stolen records when requested. 
• Progress notes consistently reflect that the patient has a high degree of pain, yet his 
condition is improving or progressing as planned. 
• Inconsistent diagnosis for the treatment rendered. 
• Provider bills on a holiday or Sundays. 
• Conflicting medical reports. 
• Claims are photocopied. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1122                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Claims for other patients are identical. 
• Billing or harassing the insurance company for payment. 
• Claimants address is different on the claim form than it is on the enrollment file. 
 
Premium Fraud Investigation Tips 
• Review the application for coverage for completeness and accuracy. 
• If the business is claiming to be new, then it should be verified that it is indeed new and 
no mod factors have been established. 
• Review the underwriting of the application for suspicious activity. If the company is a 
large company and has a small payroll, verify the number of employees, as well as their 
classification. 
• Review claims to determine if they are consistent with the type of employment reported 
and the number of employees claimed. 
• Conduct an on-site audit of their payroll and related records for the policy period as well 
as to determine where their principal place of employment is located. 
• Observe if there are too many clerical employees or other low risk occupations that 
make up the calculation leading you to believe that the records are misstated. 
• Analyze the financial statements, when available, to determine what payroll expenses 
actually are compared to what is reported. 
• Review accident and injury reports for suspicious activities. 
• Conduct surveillance as needed to observe and document various activities. 
• Document findings and report the results of the activity as required.  
 
Claimant Fraud Investigation Tips
• In spite of the possible indicators of fraud, medical treatment must be secured 
immediately, but an investigation should be opened immediately if there is a suspicion of 
fraud. 
• The manager who is responsible for the area where the injury occurred should initiate an 
investigation on each reportable accident. 
• As soon as possible the accident should be discussed with the employee. 
• Obtain a signed statement from the employee as soon as the employee is able to do so. 
• In obtaining a signed statement, the following questions should be answered as 
applicable: 
? What was the employee doing just prior to the accident, and after the accident? 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1123 
? Was the employee carrying out his regular duties and in the manner they should 
normally be conducted? 
? Had the employee been properly instructed as to how to safely perform the duties? 
When, and by whom? 
? Did they work in accordance with these instructions? 
? Did another employee cause the injury? 
? Was the equipment or machinery properly guarded and in good condition? 
? Was the equipment suited for the purpose it was being used? 
? Was the workplace properly lighted? 
? What were the housekeeping conditions in the area? 
? Does the work being done by the injured employee differ in any way from that being 
performed by other employees? 
? Is there a safer way that his operation can be performed? 
? Was the injured employee in good health when he reported to work on the date of 
the accident? 
 
Have an independent medical examination performed to document the illness. The person 
performing the exam should photograph the patient, obtain a copy of the patient’s photo 
identification such as a driver’s license, and obtain the patient’s signature. 
The following questions should be asked: 
• Are you disabled from working? 
• Are you now working part-time, full-time, or not at all? 
• What are your daily activities? 
• What is your activity level with regards to your ability to walk, jog, run, drive, swim, or 
participate in sports activities or hobbies? 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1201 



:


worker compens fraud
worker compens law requir employ or their insur plan to reimburs an
employe or on hi behalf for injuri that occur on the job regardless of who is at fault
and without delai of legal proceed to determin fault the injuri mai be physic such
as a broken limb or mental such as stress
common scheme
scheme ar gener broken into four categori premium fraud agent fraud claimant
fraud and organ fraud scheme
premium fraud
misrepres inform to the insur by employ to lower the cost of worker
compens premium
employe classif
worker compens rate vari depend on the job classif of an employe
employe that have a higher risk for injuri on the job will have a higher premium rate
cleric employe have a lower probabl for an injuri than for exampl truck driver or
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11115
construct worker and accordingli their premium should be lower therefor to lower
their premium rate an employ might intention misclassifi employe
understat of payrol
the premium for a specif job classif is base on the total payrol for that
classif the employ mai underst the amount of the payrol for higher risk
classif
exampl
two men in massachusett plead guilti to charg of conspiraci and mail fraud in
connect with a fraudul scheme to re duce worker compens claim for a
construct compani the men fals report that worker in highrisk trade were
engag in less danger occup in order to lower premium thei also conceal
million of dollar on the compani payrol from the insur compani therebi avoid
worker compens payment on those dollar
exampl
a bois coupl found themselv respons for a 71049 judgment after be accus of
misreport payrol in their drywal busi two former employe tip off investig
that thei were be paid with check bear differ compani name
half of their payrol monei wa paid by an insur drywal compani and the other half
came from on that wa not insur worker compens claim came from the
compani that wa pai premium
geograph locat of the insur oper
premium rate differ significantli base on geograph locat from state to state an
employ might have a storefront locat or a po box in a state that ha lower rate a
multist employ mai list all of it employe as oper in the state that ha the lowest
rate
histori of past loss
the modif or mod factor is a multipli that is us to determin premium rate
the multipli is deriv by compar the employ claim histori with other employ
claim histori in the same industri the higher the claim loss the higher the mod and
thu the higher the premium a new busi will start with a neutral mod for that type of
insur fraud financi transact
11116 2011 fraud examin manual
busi employ that have a high mod factor mai becom a new busi that doe
not have a mod establish and thu have lower premium than it should
corpor gerrymand
the risk pool assign to an employ will accept ani busi no matter what the claim
experi is howev it doe not have to accept ani employ that ow premium some
employ will creat a new corpor entiti in order to obtain coverag or to avoid higher
premium due to past heavi loss
exampl
fireman fund insur wa award a 15 million judgment against a hollywood
entertain compani in a suit involv a worker compens fraud scheme the
entertain compani set up a shell corpor to pose as a startup product compani
need insur the ruse allow the compani to get worker compens at much
lower rate than if fireman fund had known who thei were actual insur the
entertain compani then manipul the coverag to other film in which it had an
interest again at significantli lower rate
forg document
some employ will forg or alter prior certif show coverag in order to collect
payment for work done or as proof of coverag to author
agent fraud
pocket premium
agent issu certif of coverag indic the custom is insur but never forward
the premium to the insur compani
conspir to reduc premium
agent mai alter the applic for coverag complet by the employ in order to be abl
to offer a lower premium to hi client
the agent mai also improperli advis the employ as to how to complet the applic
the agent mai also advis the employ to transfer a group of employe into a lower risk
classif to avoid the experi modifi
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11117
while the employ mai not be awar that the scheme ar a violat of law sinc the
employ sign the applic he can be charg for hi part in the scheme howev
unknow
claimant fraud
misrepres the circumst of ani injuri or fabric that an injuri occur
injuri fraud
in thi type of fraud fals inform about the injur worker is submit to the worker
compens carrier the report describ the injuri and state the employe is either total
or partial disabl and either unabl to work or onli abl to work parttim in mani of
these scheme the fraud is help along by a doctor who for a fee will provid a fals
diagnosi and fals medic record for phoni treatment
the employe mai stage an accid and fabric an injuri or actual have an accid and
then exagger the injuri
exampl
a former personnel supervisor for the citi of lo angel wa charg with embezzl
fund from the citi worker compens system it wa charg that she provid
inform to a doctor that enabl him to submit almost 500000 in fake claim for
medic servic that were supposedli provid to citi employe the supervisor wa also
alleg to have work on her own alter the computer personnel record and then
author payment of 300000 in bogu disa biliti claim to her friend and rel
exampl
a firefight in washington wa arrest for insur fraud relat to worker
compens payment he had receiv the man claim he fell off a ladder and injur
hi knee while work as a meat cutter in a groceri store he collect temporari disabl
benefit and receiv medic treatment for six month complain of pain and tell
doctor that he could bare walk at the same time the man wa train with hi citi fire
depart as a reserv firefight the train consist of strenuou exercis such as
heavi lift and an hour of physic train each dai
insur fraud financi transact
11118 2011 fraud examin manual
secondari employ
employe who ar collect worker compens benefit mai also secur a job with
anoth employ either parttim or fulltim the employe mai fake hi ident or
assum someon els ident to receiv compens
organ fraud
organ fraud scheme ar compos of the unit effort of a lawyer a capper a doctor
and the claimant thi scheme is us not onli in worker compens case but also in
other medic fraud such as automobil injuri
the lawyer
lawyer ar usual the organ of the scheme and the on who will profit the most
the major of worker compens case ar accept on a conting fee basi if no
settlement is award then the lawyer will not be paid thi is a high volum busi and
the lawyer do not want the case to be litig thei ar reli on the insur
compani desir to settl as quickli as possibl
the lawyer will entic the claimant into secur their servic by promis a larg
settlement from the insur compani the claimant mai or mai not have to undergo the
medic test sinc the onli requir of the claimant is that thei be insur the lawyer
will then refer the injur parti to a doctor for treatment
the capper
capper also known as runner or steerer ar us to recruit patient for the scheme thei
mai be emploi by either the attornei or doctor and ar paid either on a percentag of the
total take or on a per person basi for bring in patient capper mai approach patient
at unemploy compens line work site scene of accid or at ani other type
of organ gather with promis of enrich patient ar brought into the scheme
exampl
in august of 2010 the last member of a group of 51 suspect in miami florida wa
arrest for insur fraud and other crime the insur fraud includ clinic worker
and owner who hire runner to recruit auto accid victim as well as stage auto
accid particip when thei ran out of legitim accid victim runner receiv
500 to 700 per patient and the estim fraudul claim from thi scheme exceed
4 million
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11119
the doctor
doctor mai be organ or player in the scheme but must be a part of it in order for it
to work properli doctor ar us to lend authent to the scheme and thei ar well
compens for their effort the doctor bill for servic that thei mai or mai not render
as well as for unnecessari servic in addit if patient have regular health insur
doctor mai doubl bill for the servic if an injuri is the result of an automobil accid
that occur while the patient wa on the job the doctor mai bill all three insur
compani the worker compens carrier the employe health insur and the
automobil carrier
becaus of coordin of benefit claus in most insur contract the insur
compani will coordin the benefit to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be
100 percent of the injuri howev the doctor will not let the patient health insur
compani know that the injuri is workrel or accidentrel and thu the claim mai be
overpaid sinc both claim ar paid at their full liabil
most of the treatment render will be offic visit xrai vascular studi physic therapi
and spinal manipul in some case hospit employe will be part of the scheme and
allow the us of the facil fraudul
red flag
document that have obvious been alter whiteout or erasur is evid
document that ar improperli fill out with entri in the wrong place or inform
that doesnt make sens
claim file where the carrier indic no record of coverag
poor qualiti photocopi of document that should be origin document
small payrol for larg contractor or employe leas oper
payrol figur report to insur that disagre with payrol report for other
purpos
claim for employe injuri inconsist with that employe classif
industri or construct enterpris with a work forc report to be in lowrat
categori
new corpor on ongo job
most of the employe from an employ with a high experi suddenli becom
employe in a new busi
agenc emploi larg number of support staff and onli ha on licens agent
insur fraud financi transact
11120 2011 fraud examin manual
the agent onli accept cash or monei order for premium
no polici is receiv after an extend time
no bill is receiv for premium
employ review of the applic indic that it is inaccur
the reclassif of the individu employe into a lower classif
the employ begin to declar a smaller payrol
claimant that have or ar
disgruntl soontoretir or face disciplinari action or layoff
involv in season work that is about to end
taken unexplain or excess time off prior to claim injuri
taken more time off than the claim injuri seem to warrant
no wit to the accid
accid that occur in an area where the employe normal would not be
work especi if it a highrisk area
delai the report of an accid
new on the job or have a histori of shortterm employ
a histori of injuri
inappropri or lack of medic treatment for injuri
experienc financi difficulti
chang physician when a work releas ha been issu
frequent chang medic provid
demand for quick or earli settlement
never at home after a seriou injuri or can onli be reach by return
telephon call
unusu familiar with worker compens procedur
consist uncoop
receiv mail at a post offic box or at an address differ from employ or
depart of motor vehicl
soft tissu injuri that ar hard to prove
incapacit but seen in activ that requir full mobil
independ medic exam that reveal conflict medic inform
a histori of self or famili employ have a trade or work in a cash busi
injuri that occur in an area where the employe would normal not be work
injuri that would not normal be the type the employe should have
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11121
injuri that occur on a late fridai afternoon or ar report on a mondai morn
if injuri ar report mondai morn the injuri could have result over
the weekend
activ involv in contact sport or physic demand hobbi
date of disabl or absenc from work that doe not coincid with the physician
date of disabl or date of treatment
unprofession diagnost terminolog
misspel medic terminolog throughout the medic report or hospit record
a pattern of accid claim by an individu or famili member
claimant that repeatedli doesnt show up for hi request independ physic
examin or is not home when the regularli schedul nurs stop by for therapi
the claimant attornei is known for handl suspici claim
attornei report hi represent began on the dai of the report incid
same doctor and attornei ar known to handl these type of case
claimant complain to the insur compani ceo in order to press for payment
the attornei threaten further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made
the attornei inquir about a settlement earli into the life of the claim
wholesal claim handl by law firm and multipl class action suit
date of the accid ar vagu or contradictori
treatment for the injuri follow previou firsttim visit to a provid
same provid alwai bill for extra time or extra consider on a claim
provid is work through an attornei
provid is reluct to commun with the insur compani
provid share the same patient with the same colleagu
provid refer patient to specif other provid
provid prescrib unnecessari suppli andor care by a specif provid
medic record ar can
medic record ar out of sequenc and miss date of servic
differ handwrit with same date of servic
lost burn or stolen record when request
progress note consist reflect that the patient ha a high degre of pain yet hi
condit is improv or progress as plan
inconsist diagnosi for the treatment render
provid bill on a holidai or sundai
conflict medic report
claim ar photocopi
insur fraud financi transact
11122 2011 fraud examin manual
claim for other patient ar ident
bill or harass the insur compani for payment
claimant address is differ on the claim form than it is on the enrol file
premium fraud investig tip
review the applic for coverag for complet and accuraci
if the busi is claim to be new then it should be verifi that it is inde new and
no mod factor have been establish
review the underwrit of the applic for suspici activ if the compani is a
larg compani and ha a small payrol verifi the number of employe as well as their
classif
review claim to determin if thei ar consist with the type of employ report
and the number of employe claim
conduct an onsit audit of their payrol and relat record for the polici period as well
as to determin where their princip place of employ is locat
observ if there ar too mani cleric employe or other low risk occup that
make up the calcul lead you to believ that the record ar misstat
analyz the financi statement when avail to determin what payrol expens
actual ar compar to what is report
review accid and injuri report for suspici activ
conduct surveil as need to observ and document variou activ
document find and report the result of the activ as requir
claimant fraud investig tip
in spite of the possibl indic of fraud medic treatment must be secur
immedi but an investig should be open immedi if there is a suspicion of
fraud
the manag who is respons for the area where the injuri occur should initi an
investig on each report accid
as soon as possibl the accid should be discuss with the employe
obtain a sign statement from the employe as soon as the employe is abl to do so
in obtain a sign statement the follow question should be answer as
applic
what wa the employe do just prior to the accid and after the accid
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11123
wa the employe carri out hi regular duti and in the manner thei should
normal be conduct
had the employe been properli instruct as to how to safe perform the duti
when and by whom
did thei work in accord with these instruct
did anoth employe caus the injuri
wa the equip or machineri properli guard and in good condit
wa the equip suit for the purpos it wa be us
wa the workplac properli light
what were the housekeep condit in the area
doe the work be done by the injur employe differ in ani wai from that be
perform by other employe
is there a safer wai that hi oper can be perform
wa the injur employe in good health when he report to work on the date of
the accid
have an independ medic examin perform to document the ill the person
perform the exam should photograph the patient obtain a copi of the patient photo
identif such as a driver licens and obtain the patient signatur
the follow question should be ask
ar you disabl from work
ar you now work parttim fulltim or not at all
what ar your daili activ
what is your activ level with regard to your abil to walk jog run drive swim or
particip in sport activ or hobbi
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11201
