2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud/Premium Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Premium Fraud  
Misrepresenting information to the insurer by employers to lower the cost of workers’ 
compensation premiums. 
 
EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION 
Workers’ compensation rates vary depending on the job classification of an employee. 
Employees that have a higher risk for injury on the job will have a higher premium rate. 
Clerical employees have a lower probability for an injury than, for example, truck drivers or 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1115 
construction workers, and accordingly their premiums should be lower. Therefore to lower 
their premium rate, an employer might intentionally misclassify employees. 
 
UNDERSTATEMENT OF PAYROLL 
The premium for a specific job classification is based on the total payroll for that 
classification. The employer may understate the amount of the payroll for higher risk 
classifications. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Two men in Massachusetts pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy and mail fraud in 
connection with a fraudulent scheme to re duce workers’ compensation claims for a 
construction company. The men falsely reported that workers in high-risk trades were 
engaged in less dangerous occupations in order to lower premiums. They also concealed 
millions of dollars on the company payroll from the insurance company, thereby avoiding 
workers’ compensation payments on those dollars. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Boise couple found themselves responsible for a $71,049 judgment after being accused of 
misreporting payroll in their drywall business. Two former employees tipped off investigators 
that they were being paid with checks bearing different company names. 
 
Half of their payroll money was paid by an insured drywall company, and the other half 
came from one that was not insured. Workers’ compensation claims came from the 
company that was paying premiums.  
 
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION OF THE INSURED’S OPERATION 
Premium rates differ significantly based on geographic location from state to state. An 
employer might have a storefront location or a P.O. box in a state that has lower rates. A 
multistate employer may list all of its employees as operating in the state that has the lowest 
rates. 
 
HISTORY OF PAST LOSSES 
The modification or “mod” factor is a multiplier that is used to determine premium rates. 
The multiplier is derived by comparing the employer’s claims history with other employers’ 
claims histories in the same industry. The higher the claims loss, the higher the mod, and 
thus the higher the premium. A new business will start with a neutral mod for that type of 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1116                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. Employers that have a high mod factor may become a “new” business that does 
not have a mod established and thus have lower premiums than it should.  
 
CORPORATE GERRYMANDERING 
The risk pool assigned to an employer will accept any business no matter what the claim 
experience is. However, it does not have to accept any employer that owes premiums. Some 
employers will create a new corporate entity in order to obtain coverage or to avoid higher 
premiums due to past heavy losses. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fireman’s Fund Insurance was awarded a $15 million judgment against a Hollywood 
entertainment company in a suit involving a workers’ compensation fraud scheme. The 
entertainment company set up a shell corporation to pose as a start-up production company 
needing insurance. The ruse allowed the company to get workers’ compensation at much 
lower rates than if Fireman’s Fund had known who they were actually insuring. The 
entertainment company then manipulated the coverage to other films in which it had an 
interest, again at significantly lower rates.  
 
FORGED DOCUMENTS 
Some employers will forge or alter prior certificates showing coverages in order to collect 
payment for work done or as proof of coverages to authorities. 
 



:


premium fraud
misrepres inform to the insur by employ to lower the cost of worker
compens premium
employe classif
worker compens rate vari depend on the job classif of an employe
employe that have a higher risk for injuri on the job will have a higher premium rate
cleric employe have a lower probabl for an injuri than for exampl truck driver or
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11115
construct worker and accordingli their premium should be lower therefor to lower
their premium rate an employ might intention misclassifi employe
understat of payrol
the premium for a specif job classif is base on the total payrol for that
classif the employ mai underst the amount of the payrol for higher risk
classif
exampl
two men in massachusett plead guilti to charg of conspiraci and mail fraud in
connect with a fraudul scheme to re duce worker compens claim for a
construct compani the men fals report that worker in highrisk trade were
engag in less danger occup in order to lower premium thei also conceal
million of dollar on the compani payrol from the insur compani therebi avoid
worker compens payment on those dollar
exampl
a bois coupl found themselv respons for a 71049 judgment after be accus of
misreport payrol in their drywal busi two former employe tip off investig
that thei were be paid with check bear differ compani name
half of their payrol monei wa paid by an insur drywal compani and the other half
came from on that wa not insur worker compens claim came from the
compani that wa pai premium
geograph locat of the insur oper
premium rate differ significantli base on geograph locat from state to state an
employ might have a storefront locat or a po box in a state that ha lower rate a
multist employ mai list all of it employe as oper in the state that ha the lowest
rate
histori of past loss
the modif or mod factor is a multipli that is us to determin premium rate
the multipli is deriv by compar the employ claim histori with other employ
claim histori in the same industri the higher the claim loss the higher the mod and
thu the higher the premium a new busi will start with a neutral mod for that type of
insur fraud financi transact
11116 2011 fraud examin manual
busi employ that have a high mod factor mai becom a new busi that doe
not have a mod establish and thu have lower premium than it should
corpor gerrymand
the risk pool assign to an employ will accept ani busi no matter what the claim
experi is howev it doe not have to accept ani employ that ow premium some
employ will creat a new corpor entiti in order to obtain coverag or to avoid higher
premium due to past heavi loss
exampl
fireman fund insur wa award a 15 million judgment against a hollywood
entertain compani in a suit involv a worker compens fraud scheme the
entertain compani set up a shell corpor to pose as a startup product compani
need insur the ruse allow the compani to get worker compens at much
lower rate than if fireman fund had known who thei were actual insur the
entertain compani then manipul the coverag to other film in which it had an
interest again at significantli lower rate
forg document
some employ will forg or alter prior certif show coverag in order to collect
payment for work done or as proof of coverag to author
