2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud/Claimant Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Claimant Fraud 
Misrepresenting the circumstances of any injury or fabricating that an injury occurred. 
 
INJURY FRAUD 
In this type of fraud, false information about the injured worker is submitted to the workers’ 
compensation carrier. The report describes the injury and states the employee is either totally 
or partially disabled and either unable to work or only able to work part-time. In many of 
these schemes the fraud is helped along by a doctor who, for a fee, will provide a false 
diagnosis and false medical records for phony treatments. 
 
The employee may stage an accident and fabricate an injury, or actually have an accident, and 
then exaggerate the injury.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A former personnel supervisor for the city of Los Angeles was charged with embezzling 
funds from the city’s workers’ compensation  system. It was charged that she provided 
information to a doctor that enabled him to submit almost $500,000 in fake claims for 
medical services that were supposedly provided  to city employees. The supervisor was also 
alleged to have, working on her own, altered the computerized personnel records and then 
authorized payment of $300,000 in bogus disa bility claims to her friends and relatives.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A firefighter in Washington was arrested for insurance fraud related to workers’ 
compensation payments he had received. The man claimed he fell off a ladder and injured 
his knee while working as a meat  cutter in a grocery store. He  collected temporary disability 
benefits and received medical treatment for six months, complaining of pain and telling 
doctors that he could barely walk. At the same time, the man was training with his city fire 
department as a reserve firefighter. The training consisted of strenuous exercise such as 
heavy lifting and an hour of physical training each day.  
 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1118                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT 
Employees who are collecting workers’ compensation benefits may also secure a job with 
another employer — either part-time or full-time. The employee may fake his identity or 
assume someone else’s identity to receive compensation. 
 



:


claimant fraud
misrepres the circumst of ani injuri or fabric that an injuri occur
injuri fraud
in thi type of fraud fals inform about the injur worker is submit to the worker
compens carrier the report describ the injuri and state the employe is either total
or partial disabl and either unabl to work or onli abl to work parttim in mani of
these scheme the fraud is help along by a doctor who for a fee will provid a fals
diagnosi and fals medic record for phoni treatment
the employe mai stage an accid and fabric an injuri or actual have an accid and
then exagger the injuri
exampl
a former personnel supervisor for the citi of lo angel wa charg with embezzl
fund from the citi worker compens system it wa charg that she provid
inform to a doctor that enabl him to submit almost 500000 in fake claim for
medic servic that were supposedli provid to citi employe the supervisor wa also
alleg to have work on her own alter the computer personnel record and then
author payment of 300000 in bogu disa biliti claim to her friend and rel
exampl
a firefight in washington wa arrest for insur fraud relat to worker
compens payment he had receiv the man claim he fell off a ladder and injur
hi knee while work as a meat cutter in a groceri store he collect temporari disabl
benefit and receiv medic treatment for six month complain of pain and tell
doctor that he could bare walk at the same time the man wa train with hi citi fire
depart as a reserv firefight the train consist of strenuou exercis such as
heavi lift and an hour of physic train each dai
insur fraud financi transact
11118 2011 fraud examin manual
secondari employ
employe who ar collect worker compens benefit mai also secur a job with
anoth employ either parttim or fulltim the employe mai fake hi ident or
assum someon els ident to receiv compens
