2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud/Organized Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Organized Fraud 
Organized fraud schemes are composed of the united efforts of a lawyer, a capper, a doctor, 
and the claimant. This scheme is used not only in workers’ compensation cases, but also in 
other medical frauds, such as automobile injuries. 
 
THE LAWYER 
Lawyers are usually the organizers of the schemes and the ones who will profit the most. 
The majority of workers’ compensation cases are accepted on a contingency fee basis. If no 
settlement is awarded, then the lawyers will not be paid. This is a high volume business, and 
the lawyers do not want the cases to be litigated. They are relying on the insurance 
company’s desire to settle as quickly as possible.  
 
The lawyers will entice the claimant into securing their services by promising a large 
settlement from the insurance company. The claimants may or may not have to undergo the 
medical tests, since the only requirement of the claimants is that they be insured. The lawyer 
will then refer the injured party to a doctor for “treatment.” 
 
THE CAPPER 
Cappers, also known as runners or steerers, are used to recruit patients for the scheme. They 
may be employed by either the attorney or doctor and are paid, either on a percentage of the 
total take or on a per person basis, for bringing in patients. Cappers may approach patients 
at unemployment compensation lines, work sites, scenes of accidents, or at any other types 
of organized gatherings. With promises of enrichment, patients are brought into the scheme. 
 
EXAMPLE 
In August of 2010, the last member of a group of 51 suspects in Miami, Florida was 
arrested for insurance fraud and other crimes. The insurance fraud included clinic workers 
and owners who hired runners to recruit auto accident victims, as well as staged auto 
accident participants when they ran out of “legitimate” accident victims. Runners received 
$500 to $700 per patient, and the estimated fraudulent claims from this scheme exceeded 
$4 million.   
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1119 
THE DOCTOR 
Doctors may be organizers or players in the scheme, but must be a part of it in order for it 
to work properly. Doctors are used to lend authenticity to the scheme, and they are well 
compensated for their efforts. The doctors bill for services that they may or may not render 
as well as for unnecessary services. In addition, if patients have regular health insurance, 
doctors may double bill for the services. If an injury is the result of an automobile accident 
that occurred while the patient was on the job, the doctor may bill all three insurance 
companies: the workers’ compensation carrier, the employee’s health insurance, and the 
automobile carrier. 
 
Because of coordination of benefit clauses in most insurance contracts, the insurance 
companies will coordinate the benefits to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be 
100 percent of the injuries. However, the doctors will not let the patient’s health insurance 
company know that the injury is work-related or accident-related and thus the claim may be 
overpaid, since both claims are paid at their full liability.  
 
Most of the treatment rendered will be office visits, x-rays, vascular studies, physical therapy, 
and spinal manipulations. In some cases hospital employees will be part of the scheme and 
allow the use of the facility fraudulently.  
 



:


organ fraud
organ fraud scheme ar compos of the unit effort of a lawyer a capper a doctor
and the claimant thi scheme is us not onli in worker compens case but also in
other medic fraud such as automobil injuri
the lawyer
lawyer ar usual the organ of the scheme and the on who will profit the most
the major of worker compens case ar accept on a conting fee basi if no
settlement is award then the lawyer will not be paid thi is a high volum busi and
the lawyer do not want the case to be litig thei ar reli on the insur
compani desir to settl as quickli as possibl
the lawyer will entic the claimant into secur their servic by promis a larg
settlement from the insur compani the claimant mai or mai not have to undergo the
medic test sinc the onli requir of the claimant is that thei be insur the lawyer
will then refer the injur parti to a doctor for treatment
the capper
capper also known as runner or steerer ar us to recruit patient for the scheme thei
mai be emploi by either the attornei or doctor and ar paid either on a percentag of the
total take or on a per person basi for bring in patient capper mai approach patient
at unemploy compens line work site scene of accid or at ani other type
of organ gather with promis of enrich patient ar brought into the scheme
exampl
in august of 2010 the last member of a group of 51 suspect in miami florida wa
arrest for insur fraud and other crime the insur fraud includ clinic worker
and owner who hire runner to recruit auto accid victim as well as stage auto
accid particip when thei ran out of legitim accid victim runner receiv
500 to 700 per patient and the estim fraudul claim from thi scheme exceed
4 million
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11119
the doctor
doctor mai be organ or player in the scheme but must be a part of it in order for it
to work properli doctor ar us to lend authent to the scheme and thei ar well
compens for their effort the doctor bill for servic that thei mai or mai not render
as well as for unnecessari servic in addit if patient have regular health insur
doctor mai doubl bill for the servic if an injuri is the result of an automobil accid
that occur while the patient wa on the job the doctor mai bill all three insur
compani the worker compens carrier the employe health insur and the
automobil carrier
becaus of coordin of benefit claus in most insur contract the insur
compani will coordin the benefit to the extent that the maximum amount paid will be
100 percent of the injuri howev the doctor will not let the patient health insur
compani know that the injuri is workrel or accidentrel and thu the claim mai be
overpaid sinc both claim ar paid at their full liabil
most of the treatment render will be offic visit xrai vascular studi physic therapi
and spinal manipul in some case hospit employe will be part of the scheme and
allow the us of the facil fraudul
