2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud/Red Flags


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Red Flags 
• Documents that have obviously been altered; white-out or erasure is evident. 
• Documents that are improperly filled out with entries in the wrong place or information 
that doesn’t make sense. 
• Claims filed where the carrier indicated no record of coverage. 
• Poor quality photocopies of documents that should be original documents. 
• Small payrolls for large contractors or employee leasing operations. 
• Payroll figures reported to insurers that disagree with payroll reported for other 
purposes. 
• Claims for employee injuries inconsistent with that employee’s classification. 
• Industrial or construction enterprises with a work force reported to be in low-rate 
categories. 
• “New” corporations on ongoing jobs. 
• Most of the employees from an employer  with a high experience suddenly become 
employees in a new business. 
• Agency employs large numbers of support staff and only has one licensed agent. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1120                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The agent only accepts cash or money orders for premiums. 
• No policy is received after an extended time. 
• No bill is received for premiums. 
• Employer review of the application indicates that it is inaccurate. 
• The reclassification of the individual employees into a lower classification. 
• The employer begins to declare a smaller payroll. 
• Claimants that have or are: 
? Disgruntled, soon-to-retire, or facing disciplinary action or layoffs. 
? Involved in seasonal work that is about to end. 
? Taken unexplained or excessive time off prior to claimed injury. 
? Taken more time off than the claimed injury seems to warrant. 
? No witnesses to the accident. 
? Accidents that occurred in an area where the employee normally would not be 
working (especially if it’s a high-risk area). 
? Delayed the reporting of an accident. 
? New on the job or have a history of short-term employment. 
? A history of injuries. 
? Inappropriate or lack of medical treatment for injuries. 
? Experiencing financial difficulties. 
? Changed physicians when a work release has been issued. 
? Frequently changed medical providers. 
? Demands for quick or early settlement. 
? Never at home after a “serious” injury or can only be reached by return  
telephone calls. 
? Unusually familiar with workers’ compensation procedures. 
? Consistently uncooperative. 
? Received mail at a post office box or at an address different from employment or 
Department of Motor Vehicles. 
? Soft tissue injuries that are hard to prove. 
? Incapacitated, but seen in activities that require full mobility. 
? Independent medical exams that reveal conflicting medical information. 
? A history of self or family employment; have a trade or work in a cash business. 
? Injuries that occur in an area where the employee would normally not be working. 
? Injuries that would not normally be the type the employee should have. 
Financial Transactions  Insurance Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1121 
? Injuries that occur on a late Friday afternoon or are reported on a Monday morning 
(if injuries are reported Monday morning, the injury could have resulted over  
the weekend). 
? Actively involved in contact sports or physically demanding hobbies. 
? Dates of disability or absences from work that does not coincide with the physician’s 
date of disability or dates of treatment. 
? Unprofessional diagnostic terminology. 
? Misspelled medical terminology throughout the medical report or hospital record. 
? A pattern of accident claims by an individual or family members. 
• Claimant that repeatedly doesn’t show up for his requested independent physical 
examinations or is not home when the regularly scheduled nurse stops by for therapy. 
• The claimant’s attorney is known for handling suspicious claims. 
• Attorney reports his representation began on the day of the reported incident. 
• Same doctor and attorney are known to handle these types of cases. 
• Claimant complains to the insurance company’s CEO in order to press for payment. 
• The attorney threatens further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made. 
• The attorney inquires about a settlement early into the life of the claim. 
• Wholesale claim handling by law firms and multiple class action suits. 
• Dates of the accident are vague or contradictory. 
• Treatment for the injury follows previous first-time visits to a provider. 
• Same provider always bills for extra time or extra consideration on a claim. 
• Provider is working through an attorney. 
• Provider is reluctant to communicate with the insurance company. 
• Provider shares the same patients with the same colleagues. 
• Provider refers patients to specific other providers. 
• Provider prescribes unnecessary supplies and/or care by a specific provider. 
• Medical records are “canned.” 
• Medical records are out of sequence and missing dates of service. 
• Different handwriting with same dates of service. 
• Lost, burned, or stolen records when requested. 
• Progress notes consistently reflect that the patient has a high degree of pain, yet his 
condition is improving or progressing as planned. 
• Inconsistent diagnosis for the treatment rendered. 
• Provider bills on a holiday or Sundays. 
• Conflicting medical reports. 
• Claims are photocopied. 
Insurance Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1122                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Claims for other patients are identical. 
• Billing or harassing the insurance company for payment. 
• Claimants address is different on the claim form than it is on the enrollment file. 
 



:


red flag
document that have obvious been alter whiteout or erasur is evid
document that ar improperli fill out with entri in the wrong place or inform
that doesnt make sens
claim file where the carrier indic no record of coverag
poor qualiti photocopi of document that should be origin document
small payrol for larg contractor or employe leas oper
payrol figur report to insur that disagre with payrol report for other
purpos
claim for employe injuri inconsist with that employe classif
industri or construct enterpris with a work forc report to be in lowrat
categori
new corpor on ongo job
most of the employe from an employ with a high experi suddenli becom
employe in a new busi
agenc emploi larg number of support staff and onli ha on licens agent
insur fraud financi transact
11120 2011 fraud examin manual
the agent onli accept cash or monei order for premium
no polici is receiv after an extend time
no bill is receiv for premium
employ review of the applic indic that it is inaccur
the reclassif of the individu employe into a lower classif
the employ begin to declar a smaller payrol
claimant that have or ar
disgruntl soontoretir or face disciplinari action or layoff
involv in season work that is about to end
taken unexplain or excess time off prior to claim injuri
taken more time off than the claim injuri seem to warrant
no wit to the accid
accid that occur in an area where the employe normal would not be
work especi if it a highrisk area
delai the report of an accid
new on the job or have a histori of shortterm employ
a histori of injuri
inappropri or lack of medic treatment for injuri
experienc financi difficulti
chang physician when a work releas ha been issu
frequent chang medic provid
demand for quick or earli settlement
never at home after a seriou injuri or can onli be reach by return
telephon call
unusu familiar with worker compens procedur
consist uncoop
receiv mail at a post offic box or at an address differ from employ or
depart of motor vehicl
soft tissu injuri that ar hard to prove
incapacit but seen in activ that requir full mobil
independ medic exam that reveal conflict medic inform
a histori of self or famili employ have a trade or work in a cash busi
injuri that occur in an area where the employe would normal not be work
injuri that would not normal be the type the employe should have
financi transact insur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11121
injuri that occur on a late fridai afternoon or ar report on a mondai morn
if injuri ar report mondai morn the injuri could have result over
the weekend
activ involv in contact sport or physic demand hobbi
date of disabl or absenc from work that doe not coincid with the physician
date of disabl or date of treatment
unprofession diagnost terminolog
misspel medic terminolog throughout the medic report or hospit record
a pattern of accid claim by an individu or famili member
claimant that repeatedli doesnt show up for hi request independ physic
examin or is not home when the regularli schedul nurs stop by for therapi
the claimant attornei is known for handl suspici claim
attornei report hi represent began on the dai of the report incid
same doctor and attornei ar known to handl these type of case
claimant complain to the insur compani ceo in order to press for payment
the attornei threaten further legal action unless a quick settlement can be made
the attornei inquir about a settlement earli into the life of the claim
wholesal claim handl by law firm and multipl class action suit
date of the accid ar vagu or contradictori
treatment for the injuri follow previou firsttim visit to a provid
same provid alwai bill for extra time or extra consider on a claim
provid is work through an attornei
provid is reluct to commun with the insur compani
provid share the same patient with the same colleagu
provid refer patient to specif other provid
provid prescrib unnecessari suppli andor care by a specif provid
medic record ar can
medic record ar out of sequenc and miss date of servic
differ handwrit with same date of servic
lost burn or stolen record when request
progress note consist reflect that the patient ha a high degre of pain yet hi
condit is improv or progress as plan
inconsist diagnosi for the treatment render
provid bill on a holidai or sundai
conflict medic report
claim ar photocopi
insur fraud financi transact
11122 2011 fraud examin manual
claim for other patient ar ident
bill or harass the insur compani for payment
claimant address is differ on the claim form than it is on the enrol file
