2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/What Is a Fraud Risk Assessment?/The Right Sponsor


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


The Right Sponsor  
Having the right sponsor for a fraud risk assessment is extremely important in ensuring its 
success and effectiveness. The sponsor must be senior enough in the organization and 
command the respect of the employees to elicit full cooperation in the process. The sponsor 
has to be someone who is committed to learning the truth about where the company’s fraud 
vulnerabilities really are. He can’t be someone who is prone to rationalization or denial; he 
must be a truth seeker. In the ideal situation, the sponsor would be an independent board 
director or audit committee member. However, a good CEO or other internal senior leader 
can be equally as effective. 
 
An organization’s culture plays a big part in influencing fraud vulnerability and risk. If the 
company’s culture is shaped by a strong and domineering leader, it would be difficult to have 
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assessment and get candid, honest participation from the 
people in the business. Think about how effective a fraud risk assessment of Tyco 
International would have been with Dennis Kozlowski as its sponsor. Similarly, a fraud risk 
assessment of Enron would have been impossible with Kenneth Lay or Jeffrey Skilling as  
its sponsor.  
 
The right sponsor is someone who is open and willing to hear the good, the bad, and the 
ugly. For example, let’s say that the fraud risk assessment reveals that one of the greatest 
fraud risks facing the organization is bribery/corruption based on the cozy nature of one of 
the key business leaders with the company’s busi ness partners. For the assessment to be fully 
effective, the sponsor needs to be independent and open in his evaluation of the situation 
and, most importantly, appropriate in his response to the situation.  
 



:


the right sponsor
have the right sponsor for a fraud risk assess is extrem import in ensur it
success and effect the sponsor must be senior enough in the organ and
command the respect of the employe to elicit full cooper in the process the sponsor
ha to be someon who is commit to learn the truth about where the compani fraud
vulner realli ar he cant be someon who is prone to ration or denial he
must be a truth seeker in the ideal situat the sponsor would be an independ board
director or audit committe member howev a good ceo or other intern senior leader
can be equal as effect
an organ cultur plai a big part in influenc fraud vulner and risk if the
compani cultur is shape by a strong and domin leader it would be difficult to have
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assess and get candid honest particip from the
peopl in the busi think about how effect a fraud risk assess of tyco
intern would have been with denni kozlowski as it sponsor similarli a fraud risk
assess of enron would have been imposs with kenneth lai or jeffrei skill as
it sponsor
the right sponsor is someon who is open and will to hear the good the bad and the
ugli for exampl let sai that the fraud risk assess reveal that on of the greatest
fraud risk face the organ is briberycorrupt base on the cozi natur of on of
the kei busi leader with the compani busi ness partner for the assess to be fulli
effect the sponsor need to be independ and open in hi evalu of the situat
and most importantli appropri in hi respons to the situat
