2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/Executing the Fraud Risk Assessment/Sample Fraud Risk Assessment Framework #1


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


Sample Fraud Risk Assessment Framework #1 1  
Using this framework, the fraud risk assessment team incorporates the following steps into 
the fraud risk assessment strategy: 
1. Identify potential inherent fraud risks. 
2. Assess the likelihood of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
3. Assess the significance to the organization of the fraud risks. 
4. Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
5. Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
6. Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
7. Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or nonexistent 
controls. 
 
                                                 
1 This framework is based on information contained in Managing the Business Risk of Fraud: A Practical Guide, 
sponsored by the Institute of Internal Auditors, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and 
the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.813 
The framework begins with a list of identified fraud risks, which are assessed for relative 
likelihood and significance of occurrence. Next, the risks are mapped to people and 
departments impacted, and to relevant controls. Subsequently, the relevant controls are 
evaluated for design effectiveness and are tested to validate their operating effectiveness. 
Lastly, residual risks are identified, and a fraud risk response is developed to address them. 
The table below provides a visual representation of the steps involved in this framework, 
and can be filled in as the fraud risk assessment is performed. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment Framework 2  
Identified 
Fraud Risks and Schemes 
Likelihood Significance People 
and/or 
Departments 
Existing 
Anti-fraud 
Controls 
Controls 
Effectiveness 
Assessment 
Residual 
Risks 
Fraud Risk 
Response 
Financial Reporting:       
       
       
       
Misappropriation o f  
Assets: 
      
       
       
       
Corruption:       
       
       
       
Other Risks:       
       
       
       
 



:


sampl fraud risk assess framework 1 1
us thi framework the fraud risk assess team incorpor the follow step into
the fraud risk assess strategi
1 identifi potenti inher fraud risk
2 assess the likelihood of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
3 assess the signific to the organ of the fraud risk
4 evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
5 identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
6 evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
7 identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or nonexist
control
1 thi framework is base on inform contain in manag the busi risk of fraud a practic guid
sponsor by the institut of intern auditor the american institut of certifi public account and
the associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4813
the framework begin with a list of identifi fraud risk which ar assess for rel
likelihood and signific of occurr next the risk ar map to peopl and
depart impact and to relev control subsequ the relev control ar
evalu for design effect and ar test to valid their oper effect
lastli residu risk ar identifi and a fraud risk respons is develop to address them
the tabl below provid a visual represent of the step involv in thi framework
and can be fill in as the fraud risk assess is perform
fraud risk assess framework 2
identifi
fraud risk and scheme
likelihood signific peopl
andor
depart
exist
antifraud
control
control
effect
assess
residu
risk
fraud risk
respons
financi report
misappropri o f
asset
corrupt
other risk
