2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 7 — Cash Register Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 7 — Cash Register Schemes  
• False refund schemes occur when an employee (1) issues a refund for fictitious 
merchandise and keeps the money or (2) overstates the amount of merchandise returned 
and skims the excess money. 
• False void schemes occur when a register worker retains a customer receipt, processes a 
fictitious voided sale, and keeps the money. 
 
1. Are refunds, voids, and discounts evaluated on a routine basis to identify patterns of activity among 
employees, departments, shi fts, merchandise, etc.?  
Companies should routinely evaluate refunds, voids, and discounts to search for patterns of 
activity that might signal fraud. 
 
2. Is there a sign posted at the register asking the customer to request and examine a sales receipt? 
Signs asking customers to request and examine sales receipts should be posted at registers. 
 
3. Are cash disbursements recorded on a pre-numbered form and reconciled daily? 
Cash disbursements should be recorded on pre-numbered forms and reconciled daily. 
 
4. Do the cash disbursement forms have  an explanation section or code? 
An explanation section or code should be included on cash disbursement forms. 
 
5. Are customers that are involved in voided sales and refunds randomly contacted to  verify the accuracy of  
the transaction?  
Customers involved in voided sales and refunds should be randomly contacted to verify the 
accuracy of the transactions. 
 
6. Is access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids rest ricted to supervisors?  
Access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids should be restricted  
to supervisors. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Do void or refund transactions have to be  approved by a supervisor and documented?  
All void or refund transactions should be approved by a supervisor and documented. 
 
8. Is documentation of void and ref und transactions maintained on file? 
Documentation of void and refund transactions should be maintained on file. 
 
9. Is missing or altered register  tape thoroughly investigated? 
Companies should thoroughly investigate any missing or altered register tape. 
 
10. Are gaps in the register tape investigated?  
Companies should investigate any gaps in the register tape. 
 
11. Are multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under any review limit investigated? 
Multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under review limits should be investigated. 
 
12. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and comparing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and comparing them to register totals. 
 
13. Are customer complaints regarding pa yment errors thoroughly investigated? 
Customer complaints regarding payment errors should be thoroughly investigated. 
 
14. Does each cashier have a separate access code to the register?  
Each cashier should be assigned a separate access code to the register. 
 
15. Does each cashier have a separate cash drawer?  
Each cashier should have a separate cash drawer. 
 
16. Is an over and short log kept for each person and/or register? 
An over and short log should be kept for each person and/or register. 
 
17. Are over and short incidents thoroughly investigated and monitored? 
Over and short incidents should be thoroughly investigated and monitored. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.851 
18. Are all “no sale" receipts accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report? 
All “no sale" receipts should be accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report. 
 
19. Is access to the register area restricted to authorized employees and supervisors?  
Companies should restrict access to register areas to authorized employees and supervisors. 
 
20. Are all cashiers periodically integrity shopped? 
Companies should periodically conduct integrity shopping on all cashiers. 
 



:


modul 7 cash regist scheme
fals refund scheme occur when an employe 1 issu a refund for fictiti
merchandis and keep the monei or 2 overst the amount of merchandis return
and skim the excess monei
fals void scheme occur when a regist worker retain a custom receipt process a
fictiti void sale and keep the monei
1 ar refund void and discount evalu on a routin basi to identifi pattern of activ among
employe depart shi ft merchandis etc
compani should routin evalu refund void and discount to search for pattern of
activ that might signal fraud
2 is there a sign post at the regist ask the custom to request and examin a sale receipt
sign ask custom to request and examin sale receipt should be post at regist
3 ar cash disburs record on a prenumb form and reconcil daili
cash disburs should be record on prenumb form and reconcil daili
4 do the cash disburs form have an explan section or code
an explan section or code should be includ on cash disburs form
5 ar custom that ar involv in void sale and refund randomli contact to verifi the accuraci of
the transact
custom involv in void sale and refund should be randomli contact to verifi the
accuraci of the transact
6 is access to the necessari control kei for refund and void rest rict to supervisor
access to the necessari control kei for refund and void should be restrict
to supervisor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4850 2011 fraud examin manual
7 do void or refund transact have to be approv by a supervisor and document
all void or refund transact should be approv by a supervisor and document
8 is document of void and ref und transact maintain on file
document of void and refund transact should be maintain on file
9 is miss or alter regist tape thoroughli investig
compani should thoroughli investig ani miss or alter regist tape
10 ar gap in the regist tape investig
compani should investig ani gap in the regist tape
11 ar multipl void or refund for amount just under ani review limit investig
multipl void or refund for amount just under review limit should be investig
12 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and compar
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and compar them to regist total
13 ar custom complaint regard pa yment error thoroughli investig
custom complaint regard payment error should be thoroughli investig
14 doe each cashier have a separ access code to the regist
each cashier should be assign a separ access code to the regist
15 doe each cashier have a separ cash drawer
each cashier should have a separ cash drawer
16 is an over and short log kept for each person andor regist
an over and short log should be kept for each person andor regist
17 ar over and short incid thoroughli investig and monitor
over and short incid should be thoroughli investig and monitor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4851
18 ar all no sale receipt account for and attach to a daili cashier report
all no sale receipt should be account for and attach to a daili cashier report
19 is access to the regist area restrict to author employe and supervisor
compani should restrict access to regist area to author employe and supervisor
20 ar all cashier period integr shop
compani should period conduct integr shop on all cashier
