2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 9 — Payroll Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 9 — Payroll Schemes  
• Ghost employee schemes occur when a person not employed by the company is on  
the payroll. 
• Overpayment schemes occur when a company pays an employee based on falsified 
hours or rates. 
• Commission schemes occur when the amount of sales made or the rate of commission is 
fraudulently inflated. 
 
1. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically  for duplicate or missing Social Security numbers?  
Organizations should check the employee payroll list periodically for duplicate or missing 
Social Security numbers that may indicate a ghost employee or overlapping payments to 
current employees. 
 
2. Are personnel records maintained independ ently of payroll and timekeeping functions?  
Personnel records should be maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions. 
 
3. Are references checked on all new hires? 
Organizations should perform reference checks on all new hires. 
 
4. Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays re viewed for compliance with company policy? 
Sick leave, vacations, and holidays should be reviewed for compliance with company policy. 
 
5. Are appropriate forms completed and signed by the employee to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions? 
Employees should complete and sign appropriate forms to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions. 
 
6. Is payroll periodically compared with personnel records for terminations?  
Payroll should periodically be compared with personnel records for terminations to ensure 
that terminated employees have been removed from the payroll. 
 
7. Are payroll checks pre-numbered and issued in sequential order?  
Payroll checks should be pre-numbered and issued in sequential order. 
 
8. Is the payroll bank account reconciled by an employee who is not involved in preparing payroll checks, does 
not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution?  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.855 
The payroll bank account should be reconciled by an employee who is not involved in 
preparing payroll checks, does not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution. 
 
9. Are payroll registers reconciled to general ledger control accounts?  
Payroll registers should be reconciled to general ledger control accounts. 
 
10. Are canceled payroll checks examined for alterations and endorsements? 
Canceled payroll checks should be examined for alterations and endorsements. 
 
11. Is access restricted to payroll check stock and signature stamps? 
Access to payroll check stock and signature stamps should be restricted. 
 
12. Are payroll withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. examined to determine if any employees are not having 
these items deducted from their paychecks?  
Payroll checks that do not have withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. should  
be investigated. 
 
13. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically for duplicate or missing home addresses and  
telephone numbers? 
The employee payroll list should be reviewed for duplicate or missing home addresses and 
telephone numbers. 
 
14. Is the account information for automatically depo sited payroll checks reviewed periodically for  
duplicate entries? 
Account information for automatically deposited payroll checks should be reviewed 
periodically for duplicate entries. 
 
15. Is an employee separate from the payroll department assigned to distribute payroll checks?  
An employee separate from the payroll department should be assigned to distribute  
payroll checks. 
 
16. Are new employees required to furnish proof of immigration status? 
Companies must require new employees to furnish proof of immigration status. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.856   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
17. Does any change to an employee’s salary require more than one level of management approval?  
Changes to an employee’s salary should require more than one level of  
management approval. 
 
18. Does overtime have to be authorized by a supervisor? 
Overtime should be authorized by a supervisor. 
 
19. Do supervisors verify and sign  timecards for each pay period? 
Supervisors should verify and sign time timecards for each pay period. 
 
20. Are commission expenses compared to sales figures to verify amounts?  
Comparing commission expenses to sales figures to verify amounts is an important control 
procedure that can help to detect payroll fraud. 
 
21. Does someone separate from the sales department calculate sales commissions?  
Someone separate from the sales department should calculate sales commissions. 
 



:


modul 9 payrol scheme
ghost employe scheme occur when a person not emploi by the compani is on
the payrol
overpay scheme occur when a compani pai an employe base on falsifi
hour or rate
commiss scheme occur when the amount of sale made or the rate of commiss is
fraudul inflat
1 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss social secur number
organ should check the employe payrol list period for duplic or miss
social secur number that mai indic a ghost employe or overlap payment to
current employe
2 ar personnel record maintain independ entli of payrol and timekeep function
personnel record should be maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
3 ar refer check on all new hire
organ should perform refer check on all new hire
4 ar sick leav vacat and holidai re view for complianc with compani polici
sick leav vacat and holidai should be review for complianc with compani polici
5 ar appropri form complet and sign by the employe to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
employe should complet and sign appropri form to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
6 is payrol period compar with personnel record for termin
payrol should period be compar with personnel record for termin to ensur
that termin employe have been remov from the payrol
7 ar payrol check prenumb and issu in sequenti order
payrol check should be prenumb and issu in sequenti order
8 is the payrol bank account reconcil by an employe who is not involv in prepar payrol check doe
not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4855
the payrol bank account should be reconcil by an employe who is not involv in
prepar payrol check doe not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
9 ar payrol regist reconcil to gener ledger control account
payrol regist should be reconcil to gener ledger control account
10 ar cancel payrol check examin for alter and endors
cancel payrol check should be examin for alter and endors
11 is access restrict to payrol check stock and signatur stamp
access to payrol check stock and signatur stamp should be restrict
12 ar payrol withhold for tax insur etc examin to determin if ani employe ar not have
these item deduct from their paycheck
payrol check that do not have withhold for tax insur etc should
be investig
13 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
the employe payrol list should be review for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
14 is the account inform for automat depo site payrol check review period for
duplic entri
account inform for automat deposit payrol check should be review
period for duplic entri
15 is an employe separ from the payrol depart assign to distribut payrol check
an employe separ from the payrol depart should be assign to distribut
payrol check
16 ar new employe requir to furnish proof of immigr statu
compani must requir new employe to furnish proof of immigr statu
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4856 2011 fraud examin manual
17 doe ani chang to an employe salari requir more than on level of manag approv
chang to an employe salari should requir more than on level of
manag approv
18 doe overtim have to be author by a supervisor
overtim should be author by a supervisor
19 do supervisor verifi and sign timecard for each pai period
supervisor should verifi and sign time timecard for each pai period
20 ar commiss expens compar to sale figur to verifi amount
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi amount is an import control
procedur that can help to detect payrol fraud
21 doe someon separ from the sale depart calcul sale commiss
someon separ from the sale depart should calcul sale commiss
