2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Misuse of Inventory and Other Assets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Misuse of Inventory and Other Assets 
There are basically two ways a person can misappropriate a company asset. The asset can be 
misused or it can be stolen. Simple misuse is obviously the less egregious of the two. Assets 
that are misused but not stolen typically include company vehicles, company supplies, 
computers, and other office equipment.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made personal use of a company vehicle while on an out-of-town assignment. 
The employee provided false information, both written and verbal, regarding the nature of 
his use of the vehicle. The vehicle was returned unharmed and the cost to the perpetrator’s 
company was only a few hundred dollars. Nevertheless, such unauthorized use of a 
company asset does amount to fraud when a false statement accompanies the use.  
 
One of the most common examples of the misuse of company assets occurs when an 
employee uses company equipment to do personal work on company time. For instance, an 
employee might use his computer at work to write letters, print invoices, or do other work 
connected with a business he runs on the side. In many instances, these side businesses are 
of the same nature as the employer’s business, so the employee is essentially competing with 
his employer and using the employer’s equipment to do it.  
 
The Costs of Inventory Misuse 
The costs of inventory misuse are difficult to quantify. To many individuals, this type of 
fraud is not viewed as a crime, but rather as “borrowing.” In truth, the cost to a company 
from this kind of scheme is often immaterial. When a perpetrator borrows a stapler for the 
night or takes home some tools to perform a household repair, the cost to his company is 
negligible, as long as the assets are returned unharmed. 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.602                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
On the other hand, misuse schemes could be very costly. Take, for example, the situation 
discussed above in which an employee uses company equipment to operate a side business 
during work hours. Since the employee is not performing his work duties, the employer 
suffers a loss in productivity. If the low productivity continues, the employer might have to 
hire additional employees to compensate, which means more capital diverted to wages. If the 
employee’s business competes with the employer’s, then lost business could be an additional 
cost. Unauthorized use of equipment can also mean additional wear and tear, causing the 
equipment to break down sooner than it would have under normal business conditions. 
Additionally, when an employee “borrows” comp any property, there is no guarantee that he 
will bring it back. This is precisely how some theft schemes begin. Despite some opinions to 
the contrary, asset misuse is not always a harmless crime.  
 
 



:


misus of inventori and other asset
there ar basic two wai a person can misappropri a compani asset the asset can be
misus or it can be stolen simpl misus is obvious the less egregi of the two asset
that ar misus but not stolen typic includ compani vehicl compani suppli
comput and other offic equip
exampl
an employe made person us of a compani vehicl while on an outoftown assign
the employe provid fals inform both written and verbal regard the natur of
hi us of the vehicl the vehicl wa return unharm and the cost to the perpetr
compani wa onli a few hundr dollar nevertheless such unauthor us of a
compani asset doe amount to fraud when a fals statement accompani the us
on of the most common exampl of the misus of compani asset occur when an
employe us compani equip to do person work on compani time for instanc an
employe might us hi comput at work to write letter print invoic or do other work
connect with a busi he run on the side in mani instanc these side busi ar
of the same natur as the employ busi so the employe is essenti compet with
hi employ and us the employ equip to do it
the cost of inventori misus
the cost of inventori misus ar difficult to quantifi to mani individu thi type of
fraud is not view as a crime but rather as borrow in truth the cost to a compani
from thi kind of scheme is often immateri when a perpetr borrow a stapler for the
night or take home some tool to perform a household repair the cost to hi compani is
neglig as long as the asset ar return unharm
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1602 2011 fraud examin manual
on the other hand misus scheme could be veri costli take for exampl the situat
discuss abov in which an employe us compani equip to oper a side busi
dure work hour sinc the employe is not perform hi work duti the employ
suffer a loss in product if the low product continu the employ might have to
hire addit employe to compens which mean more capit divert to wage if the
employe busi compet with the employ then lost busi could be an addit
cost unauthor us of equip can also mean addit wear and tear caus the
equip to break down sooner than it would have under normal busi condit
addition when an employe borrow comp ani properti there is no guarante that he
will bring it back thi is precis how some theft scheme begin despit some opinion to
the contrari asset misus is not alwai a harmless crime
