2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Theft of Inventory and Other Assets 
While the misuse of company property might be a problem, the theft of company property is 
obviously of greater concern. Losses resulting from larceny of company assets can run into 
the millions of dollars. Most schemes where inventory and other non-cash assets are stolen 
fall into one of four categories: larceny schemes, asset requisition and transfer schemes, 
purchasing and receiving schemes, and false shipment schemes. 
 
Larceny Schemes  
The textbook definition of larceny is “Felonious stealing, taking and carrying, leading, riding, 
or driving away another’s personal property, with intent to convert it or to deprive owner 
thereof. The unlawful taking and carrying away of property of another with intent to 
appropriate it to use inconsistent with latter’s rights.” 1 This definition is so broad, it 
encompasses every kind of asset theft. In order to gain a more specific understanding of the 
methods used to steal inventory and other assets, the definition of larceny has been 
restricted. For the purposes of classifying asset misappropriations, the term larceny is meant 
to refer to the most basic type of inventory theft, the schemes in which an employee simply 
takes inventory from the company premises without attempting to conceal the theft in the 
books and records. (See “Non-cash Larceny” flowchart.) In other fraud schemes, employees 
may create false documentation to justify the shipment of merchandise or tamper with 
inventory records to conceal missing assets. La rceny schemes are more blunt. The culprit in 
these crimes takes company assets without trying to “justify” their absence.  
                                                          
1 Blacks, p. 792. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.603 
 
 
 
Most non-cash larceny schemes are not very complicated. They are typically committed by 
employees (warehouse personnel, inventory clerks, shipping clerks, etc.) with access to 
inventory or supplies. Many employees simply carry company assets away in open view of 
other employees. People tend to assume that their friends and acquaintances are acting 
honestly. When they see a trusted coworker taking something out of the workplace, most 
people assume that the culprit has a legitimate reason for doing so.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.604                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A university faculty member was leaving his offic es to take a position at a new school. This 
person was permitted to take a small number of items to his new job, but certainly exceeded 
the intentions of the school when he loaded tw o trucks full of university lab equipment and 
computers worth several hundred thousand doll ars. The perpetrator simply packed up these 
stolen assets along with his personal items and drove away.  
 
Unfortunately, in all too many cases the coworkers of the perpetrator are fully aware that he 
is stealing company assets, yet they refrain from reporting the crime. There are several 
reasons that employees might ignore illegal conduct, such as a sense of duty to their friends, 
a “management vs. labor” mentality, poor channe ls of communication for whistleblowers, or 
intimidation of honest employees by the thief. When high-ranking personnel are stealing 
from their companies, employees often overlook the crime because they fear they will lose 
their jobs if they report it. In some cases, the coworkers may be assisting in the theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A school superintendent was not only pilfering school accounts but was also stealing school 
assets. A search of his residence revealed a cell ar filled with school property. A number of 
school employees knew or suspected the superintendent was involved in illegal dealings, but 
he was very powerful and people were afraid to report him for fear of retaliation. As a 
result, he was able to steal from  the school for several years.  
 
Ironically, employees who steal inventory are often highly trusted within their organizations. 
Because these employees are trusted, they may be given access to restricted areas, safes, 
supply rooms, or other areas where company assets are kept. This access makes it easy for 
these employees to steal.  
 
It can be unwise for an employee to physically carry inventory and other assets off the 
premises of his company. This practice carries with it the inherent risk and potential 
embarrassment of being caught red-handed with stolen goods on his person. Some 
employees avoid this problem by mailing company assets from the victim organization to a 
location where they can retrieve them without fear of being observed.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.605 
EXAMPLE 
A spare-parts custodian took several thousand dollars worth of computer chips and mailed 
them to a company that had no  business dealings with the custodian’s employer. He then 
reclaimed the merchandise as his own. By taking the step of mailing the stolen inventory, 
the fraudster allowed the postal service to  unwittingly do his dirty work for him. 
 
The False Sale 
In many cases, corrupt employees utilize outside accomplices to help steal inventory. The 
fake sale is one method that depends upon an accomplice. Like most inventory thefts, the 
fake sale is not complicated. The accomplice of the employee-fraudster pretends to buy 
merchandise, but the employee does not ring up the sale. The accomplice takes the 
merchandise without paying for it. To a casual observer, it will appear that the transaction is 
a normal sale. The employee bags the merchandise, and may act as though a transaction is 
being entered on the register, but in fact, the “sale” is not recorded. The accomplice may 
even pass a nominal amount of money to the employee to complete the illusion. A related 
scheme occurs when an employee sells merchandise to an accomplice at an unauthorized 
discount.  
 
Employees also sometimes enlist accomplices to return goods that the employee has already 
stolen. This is an easy way for the employee to convert the stolen inventory into cash. 
 
Asset Requisitions and Transfers 
Asset requisitions and other documents that allow non-cash assets to be moved from one 
location in a company to another can be used to facilitate the theft of those assets. 
Employees use internal transfer paperwork to gain access to merchandise that they otherwise 
might not be able to handle without raising suspicion. These documents do not account for 
missing merchandise the way false sales do, but they allow a person to move the assets from 
one location to another. In the process of this movement, the thief steals the merchandise. 
 
The most basic scheme occurs when an employee requisitions materials for some work-
 related project, then makes off with the materials. In some cases the employee simply 
overstates the amount of supplies or equipment it will take to complete his work and pilfers 
the excess. In more ambitious schemes the employee might invent a completely fictitious 
project that necessitates the use of certain assets he intends to steal.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.606                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An employee of a telecommunications company used false project documents to request 
approximately $100,000 worth of computer chips, allegedly to upgrade company 
computers. Knowing that this type of requisiti on required verbal authorization from another 
source, the employee set up an elaborate phone scheme to get the “project” approved. The 
fraudster used his knowledge of the company’s phone system to forward calls from four 
different lines to his own desk. When the confirmation call was made, it was the 
perpetrator who answered the phone and authorized the project.  
 
Dishonest employees sometimes falsify asset transfer forms so they can remove inventory 
from a warehouse or stockroom. The false documents allow the employee to remove 
merchandise from the warehouse, but instead of using it for a work-related purpose, the 
perpetrator simply takes it home. The obvious problem with this type of scheme is that the 
person who orders the merchandise will usually be the primary suspect when it turns  
up missing.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager requested merchandise from the company warehouse to be displayed on a 
showroom floor. The pieces he re quested never made it to the showroom, because he loaded 
them into a pickup truck and took them home. In some instances he actually took the 
items in broad daylight and with the help of  another employee. This individual thought he 
was immune from detection because the merchandise was requested via computer using a 
management level security code. The code was not specific to any one manager, so there 
would be no way of knowing which manager had ordered the merchandise. Unfortunately 
for the thief, the company was able to record the computer terminal from which the request 
originated. The manager had used  his own computer to make the request, which led to his 
undoing. 
 
Purchasing and Receiving Schemes 
Dishonest employees can also manipulate the purchasing and receiving functions of a 
company to facilitate the theft of inventory and other assets. It might seem that any 
purchasing scheme should fall under the heading of false billings, which were discussed 
earlier. There is, however, a distinction between the purchasing schemes that are classified as 
false billings and those that are classified as non-cash misappropriations.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.607 
If an employee causes his company to purchase merchandise that the company does not 
need, this is a false billing scheme. The harm to the company comes in paying for assets for 
which it has no use. On the other hand, if the assets were intentionally purchased by the 
company and later misappropriated by the perpetrator, this is classified as an inventory 
larceny scheme. Here the company loses both the value of the merchandise and the use of 
the merchandise.  
 
Falsifying Incoming Shipments 
One of the most common examples of an employee abusing the purchasing and receiving 
functions occurs when a person charged with receiving goods on behalf of the victim 
company—such as a warehouse supervisor or receiving clerk—falsifies the records of 
incoming shipments. If, for example, 1,000 units of a particular item are received, the 
perpetrator indicates that only 900 were received. By marking the shipment short, the 
perpetrator can steal the 100 units that are unaccounted for.  
 
The obvious problem with this kind of scheme is the fact that the receiving report does not 
match the vendor’s invoice, which will likely ca use a problem with payment. In the example 
above, if the vendor bills for 1,000 units but the accounts payable voucher only shows 
receipt of 900 units of merchandise, then someone will have to explain where the extra 100 
units went.  
 
Some employees avoid this problem by altering only one copy of the receiving report. The 
copy that is sent to accounts payable indicates receipt of a full shipment so the vendor will 
be paid without any questions. The copy used for inventory records indicates a short 
shipment so that the assets on hand will equal the assets in the perpetual inventory.  
 
Instead of marking shipments short, the perpetrator might reject portions of a shipment as 
not being up to quality specifications. The perpetrator then keeps the “substandard” 
merchandise rather than sending it back to the supplier. The result is the same as if the 
shipment had been marked short.  
 
False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets 
To conceal thefts of inventory and other assets, employees sometimes create false shipping 
documents and false sales documents to make it appear that the inventory they take was sold 
rather than stolen. (See “False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets” flowchart.) The 
document that tells the shipping department to release inventory for delivery is usually the 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.608                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
packing slip. By creating a false packing slip, a corrupt employee can cause inventory to be 
fraudulently delivered to himself or an accomplice. The “sales” reflected in the packing slips 
are typically made to a fictitious person, a fictitious company, or an accomplice of the 
perpetrator.  
 
One benefit of using false shipping documents to misappropriate inventory or other assets is 
that the product is removed from the warehouse or storeroom by someone other than the 
perpetrator. The victim organization unknowingly delivers the targeted assets to the 
perpetrator of the scheme.  
 
False packing slips allow inventory to be shipped from the victim company to the 
perpetrator, but alone they do not conceal the fact that inventory has been misappropriated. 
In order to hide the theft, fraudsters may create a false sale on the books so it appears that 
the missing inventory was shipped to a customer. Depending on how the victim 
organization operates, the perpetrator may have to create a false purchase order from the 
“buyer,” a false sales order, and a false invoice along with the packing slip to create the 
illusion of a sale.  
 
The result is that a fake receivable account goes into the books for the price of the 
misappropriated inventory. Obviously, the “buyer” of the merchandise will never pay for it. 
How do employees deal with these fake receivables? In some cases, the employee simply lets 
the receivable age on his company’s books until it  is eventually written off as uncollectible. 
In other instances he might take affirmative steps to remove the sale—and the delinquent 
receivable that results—from the books.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee generated false invoices and delivered them to the company warehouse for 
shipping. The invoices were then marked “delivered” and sent to the sales office. The 
perpetrator removed all copies of the invoices fr om the files before they were billed to the 
fictitious customer. 
 
Another common way to get rid of delinquent receivables that result from theft schemes is 
to write off the receivables to accounts such as discounts and allowances, bad debt expense, or lost 
and stolen assets.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.609 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.610                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Instead of creating completely fictitious sales, some employees understate legitimate sales so 
that an accomplice is billed for less than delivered. The result is that a portion of the 
merchandise is sold at no cost. In a typical scenario, a salesman fills out shipping tickets, 
which are forwarded to the warehouse. After the merchandise is shipped, the salesman 
instructs the warehouse employees to return the shipping tickets to him for “extra work” 
before they are sent to the invoicing department. The salesman then alters the shipping 
tickets, reducing either the quantity of merchandise sold or the price per unit sold. 
 
Write-offs are often used to conceal the theft of assets after they have been stolen. In some 
cases, however, assets are written off in order to make them available for theft. For instance, 
an employee with the authority to declare inventory obsolete can write off this inventory as 
“scrap.” Once assets are designated as scrap, it is often easier to misappropriate them. 
Fraudsters may be allowed to take the “useless” assets for themselves, buy them or sell them 
to an accomplice at a greatly reduced price, or simply give the assets away.  
 
Concealing Inventory Shrinkage 
When inventory is stolen, the key concealment issue for the perpetrator is shrinkage. Inventory 
shrinkage  is the unaccounted-for reduction in the company’s inventory that results from theft. 
For instance, assume a computer retailer has 1,000 computers in stock. After work one day, 
an employee loads 10 computers into a truck and takes them home. Now the company only 
has 990 computers, but since there is no record that the employee took 10 computers, the 
inventory records still show 1,000 units on hand. The company has experienced inventory 
shrinkage in the amount of 10 computers.  
 
Shrinkage is one of the red flags that signal fraud. The goal of the perpetrator is to proceed 
with his scheme undetected, so it is in his best interest to prevent anyone from looking for 
missing assets. This means concealing the shrinkage that occurs from asset theft. 
 
Inventory and other assets are typically tracked through a two-step process. The first step, 
the perpetual inventory, is a running count that records how much inventory should be on 
hand. When new shipments of merchandise are received, for instance, this merchandise is 
entered into the perpetual inventory. Similarly, when goods are sold they are removed from 
the perpetual inventory records. In this way a company tracks its inventory on a day-to-day 
basis.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.611 
Periodically, a physical count of assets on hand should be made. In this process, someone 
actually goes through the storeroom or warehouse and counts everything that the company 
has in stock. This total is then matched to the amount of assets reflected in the perpetual 
inventory. A variation between the physical inventory and the perpetual inventory totals is 
shrinkage. While a certain amount of shrinkage may be expected in any business, large 
shrinkage totals may indicate fraud.  
 
Altered Inventory Records 
One of the simplest methods for concealing shrinkage is to change the perpetual inventory 
record so that it will match the physical inventory count. This is also known as a forced 
reconciliation of the account. The perpetrator simply changes the numbers in the perpetual 
inventory to make them match the amount of inventory on hand. For example, the 
employee might credit the perpetual inventory and debit the cost of sales account to bring 
the perpetual inventory numbers into line with the actual inventory count. Instead of using 
correcting entries to adjust the perpetual inventory, some employees simply delete or cover 
up the correct totals and enter new numbers. 
 
There are two sides to the inventory equation: the perpetual inventory and the physical 
inventory. Instead of altering the perpetual inventory, a perpetrator who has access to the 
records from a physical inventory count can change those records to match the perpetual 
inventory. Returning to the computer store example, assume the company counts its 
inventory every month and matches it to the perpetual inventory. The physical count should 
come to 990 computers, since that is what is actually on hand. If the perpetrator is someone 
charged with counting inventory, he can simply write down that there are 1,000 units  
on hand. 
 
Fictitious Sales and Accounts Receivable 
When the perpetrator makes an adjusting entry to the perpetual inventory and cost of sales 
accounts as discussed above, there is no sales transaction on the books that corresponds to 
these entries. In order to fix this problem, a perpetrator might enter a debit to accounts 
receivable and a corresponding credit to the sales account so that it appears the missing 
goods have been sold.  
 
Of course, the problem of payment then arises, because no one is going to pay for the goods 
that were “sold” in this transaction. There are two routes that a fraudster might take in this 
circumstance. The first is to charge the sale to an existing account. In some cases, employees 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.612                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
charge fake sales to existing receivables that are so large that the addition of the assets that 
the perpetrator has stolen will not be noticed. Other corrupt employees charge the “sales” to 
accounts that are already aging and will soon be written off. When these accounts are 
removed from the books, the perpetrator’s stolen  inventory effectively disappears. The other 
adjustment that is typically made is a write-off to discounts and allowances or bad debt expense.  
 
Write-off of Inventory and Other Assets 
Writing off inventory and other assets is a relatively common way for employees to remove 
assets from the books before or after they are stolen. This eliminates the problem of 
shrinkage that inherently exists in every case of non-cash asset misappropriation.  
 
Physical Padding 
Most methods of concealment deal with altering inventory records, either changing the 
perpetual inventory or miscounting during the physical inventory. In the alternative, some 
employees try to make it appear that there are more assets present in the warehouse or 
stockroom than there actually are. Empty boxes or boxes filled with bricks or other 
inexpensive materials, for example, may be stacked on shelves to create the illusion of extra 
inventory.  
 
Detection of Inventory Schemes 
Statistical Sampling 
Companies with inventory accounts typically have enormous populations of source 
documents. Statistical sampling allows the fraud examiner to inspect key attributes on a 
smaller portion (or sample) of those documents. For example, the examiner may select a 
statistically valid, random sample of purchase requisitions to determine that all requisitions in 
the sample selected were properly approved. Statistical sampling enables the examiner to 
predict the occurrence rate for the population and, therefore, determine with some accuracy 
the error rate or the potential for fraud. 
 
Other items that may be sampled on a statistical basis include the following: 
• Receiving reports 
• Perpetual inventory records 
• Raw materials requisitions 
• Shipping documents 
• Job cost sheets 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.613 
The attributes tested for on the above-mentioned documents might include a specific date, 
item, or location.  
 
Perpetual Inventory Records 
Unexplained entries in the perpetual records might reveal embezzlement losses.  
• Are all the reductions to the perpetual inventory records explained by source documents 
(such as sales invoices, approvals to remove to scrap inventory, or spoilage)?  
• Are all increases in perpetual records explained by source documents such as receiving 
reports? 
 
Shipping Documents  
Inventory theft may be uncovered by answers to questions such as:  
• Are all sales properly matched with a shipping document?  
• Are any shipping documents not associated with a sale?  
• Is inventory disappearing from storage? 
 
Physical Inventory Counts 
Physical inventory counts can sometimes give rise to inventory theft detection. However, 
because other explanations satisfy inventory shortages (such as shrinkage), historical analysis 
of inventory is usually necessary. Furthermore, if the only method used to detect inventory 
fraud is the year-end physical count, the perpetrators will have had all year to devise 
concealment methods to circumvent potential detection. 
 
Analytical Review 
By using an analytical review, inventory fraud may be detected because certain trends 
become immediately clear. For example, if the cost of goods sold increases by a 
disproportionate amount relative to sales, and no changes occur in the purchase prices, 
quantities purchased, or quality of products purchased, the cause of the disproportionate 
increase in cost of goods sold might be one of two things: (1) ending inventory has been 
depleted by theft, or (2) someone has been embezzling money through a false billing scheme 
(i.e., submitting invoices and collecting the payments for inventory that was never delivered). 
 
An analytical review of all the component parts of the cost of goods sold should indicate to 
the examiner where to direct further inquiries. For example, assuming that the type of 
inventory purchased is the same and there is no change in the manufacturing process or 
purchase price, if sales and cost of sales change from $5,650,987 and $2,542,944 to 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.614                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
$6,166,085 and $2,981,880, respectively, what is the data telling the examiner? To begin, sales 
have increased by 9.12 percent whereas cost of sales increased by 17.26 percent. The profit 
margin has decreased by 3 percent (from 55 to 52 percent). Based on this data, the fraud 
examiner might want to look further at the components of inventory, such as beginning 
inventory, purchases, and ending inventory. If beginning inventory was $1,207,898, 
purchases were $2,606,518, and $2,604,972, respectively, and ending inventory was $894,564, 
then an inventory matrix would look like the following: 
 
 Year 1   Year 2  Percentage Change 
Beginning Inventory $1,207,898 $1,271,472  5.26% 
Purchases  2,606,518  2,604,972 <0.06%> 
Goods Available for Sale $3,814,416 $3,876,444  1.63% 
Ending Inventory <1,271,472>  < 894,564>  <29.64%> 
Cost of Sales $2,542,944 $2,981,880 17.26% 
 
Inventory purchases, as a percentage of sales, have declined from 46.13 to 42.25 percent. 
From this example, one can hypothesize that: (1) inventory purchases were purposely 
increased in year one only to be liquidated in year two, (2) the increased sales in year two 
were unexpected and the purchase of inventory did not keep pace with the sales, or (3) there 
might be some fraud scheme in inventory. If, by interview, the examiner is unable to 
ascertain a reasonable explanation such as (1) or (2) above, then further examination of the 
ending inventory may be warranted. 
 
The fraud examiner may next look at the differences in the physical inventory procedures, to 
see if that created a more (or less) accurate inventory count at the end of either year one or 
year two. If there is no other logical explanation, then further investigation into these and 
other inventory accounts may be necessary to explain the anomalies occurring in inventory. 
 
Computer-Generated Trend Analysis 
The computer can be used to facilitate obtaining lists of items with specified attributes. For 
example, in a lumberyard operation, the computer can be programmed to list all purchases 
of four by four cedar fence posts eight feet in length. Examine all the source documents that 
are represented by the listing. By examining the source documents for each of these 
purchases, the examiner can plot trends to determine the occurrence of the following (or 
other) patterns: 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.615 
SEARCHES SCHEMES
 Purchases by vendor If the same vendor is receiving favorable treatment 
Inventory levels by types and dates If inventory is being purchased at its reorder point or if excess 
inventory is being ordered 
Inventory shipped by address If the vendor’s address matches either an employee address or 
the address of another vendor 
Cost per item  If discounts are properly credited to purchases 
Direct labor by item If there are excess labor hours being added to a particular job 
or item 
Direct materials by item If materials are properly charged to the job (too much or the 
wrong materials) 
Overhead per inventory item If overhead is being properly applied, and applied only once
 Disposals then reorders If usable inventory is being prematurely designated as scrap
 Shortages by inventory item If there is inventory theft or the reorder system is not 
functioning 
Returns and allowances If there is an unusually high incidence of returns and 
allowances  
Sales allowances If sales allowances are not properly credited to promotional 
allowances 
Buyer If the buyer is not acting within scope of authority 
 
Detailed Audit Program 
The following audit program will also be helpful in establishing inventory control: 
• Do adequate, detailed, written inventory instructions and procedures exist? Do inventory 
procedures give appropriate consideration to the location and arrangement of 
inventories? 
• Do inventory procedures give appropriate consideration to identification and description 
of inventories? 
• Is the method of determining inventory quantities specified (e.g., weight, count)? 
• Is the method used for recording items counted adequate (e.g., count sheets, 
prenumbered tags)? 
• Are inventory tags used? If yes: (1) Are they prenumbered? (2) Is accounting for 
inventory tags adequate and does it include control with respect to tags used, unused, 
and voided? 
• Are adequate procedures in place to identify inventory counted, ensure that all items 
have been counted, and prevent double counting? 
• Are obsolete, slow-moving, or damaged inventories properly identified and segregated? 
• Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
records (e.g., description, stage of completion)? 
• Are inventory counts subject to (1) complete recounts by persons independent of the 
ones involved in the initial counts, (2) recounts only of merchandise having substantial 
value, or (3) spot checks by supervisory personnel? 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.616                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are counts performed by employees whose functions are independent of the physical 
custody of inventories and record-keeping functions?   
• Do proper accounting controls and procedures exist for the exclusion from inventory of 
merchandise on-hand that is not property of the client (e.g., customers’ merchandise, 
consignments in)? 
• Do proper accounting controls and procedures exist for the inclusion in inventory of 
merchandise not on-hand, but the property of the client (e.g., merchandise in 
warehouses, out on repair, consignments out)? 
• Will identical inventory items in various areas be accumulated to allow a tie in total 
counts to a summary listing subsequent to the observation? 
• Is the movement of inventory adequately controlled (e.g., shipping and receiving 
activities suspended) during the physical count to ensure a proper cut-off? 
• Are significant differences between physical counts and detailed inventory records 
investigated before the accounting and inventory records are adjusted to match the 
physical counts? 
• Will inventory at remote locations be counted? 
• Will special counting procedures or volume conversions be necessary (e.g., items 
weighed on scale)? 
• How will work-in-process inventory be identified? 
• How will the stage of completion of work-in-process inventory be identified? 
• Are there any other matters that should be noted for the inventory count? 2 
 
Prevention of Inventory Schemes 
There are four basic measures which, if properly installed and implemented, may help 
prevent inventory fraud. They are proper documentation, segregation of duties (including 
approvals), independent checks, and physical safeguards. 
 
Proper Documentation 
The following items should be prenumbered and controlled:  
• Requisitions 
• Receiving reports 
• Perpetual records 
  
                                                          
2 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures,  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.617 
• Raw materials requisitions 
• Shipping documents 
• Job cost sheets 
 
However, not all inventory requires the purchasing of raw materials. In these cases, the 
proper documentation might take the form of prenumbered and controlled tickets and 
receipts for sales. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
The following duties should be handled by different personnel: 
• Requisition of inventory 
• Receipt of inventory 
• Disbursement of inventory 
• Conversion of inventory to scrap 
• Receipt of proceeds from disposal of scrap 
 
Independent Checks 
Someone independent of the purchasing or warehousing functions should conduct physical 
observation of inventory. The personnel conducting the physical observations should also be 
knowledgeable about the inventory. 
 
Physical Safeguards 
All merchandise should be physically guarded and locked; access should be limited to 
authorized personnel only. For example, strategic placement of security guards may aide in 
the detection and deterrence of potential theft schemes. Electronic methods may also be 
used, such as cameras and surveillance devices. The effectiveness of any device will, 
however, depend on the employee’s knowledge that physical safeguard controls are adhered 
to and on the type of inventory available for misappropriation. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.701 



:


theft of inventori and other asset
while the misus of compani properti might be a problem the theft of compani properti is
obvious of greater concern loss result from larceni of compani asset can run into
the million of dollar most scheme where inventori and other noncash asset ar stolen
fall into on of four categori larceni scheme asset requisit and transfer scheme
purchas and receiv scheme and fals shipment scheme
larceni scheme
the textbook definit of larceni is feloni steal take and carri lead ride
or drive awai anoth person properti with intent to convert it or to depriv owner
thereof the unlaw take and carri awai of properti of anoth with intent to
appropri it to us inconsist with latter right 1 thi definit is so broad it
encompass everi kind of asset theft in order to gain a more specif understand of the
method us to steal inventori and other asset the definit of larceni ha been
restrict for the purpos of classifi asset misappropri the term larceni is meant
to refer to the most basic type of inventori theft the scheme in which an employe simpli
take inventori from the compani premis without attempt to conceal the theft in the
book and record see noncash larceni flowchart in other fraud scheme employe
mai creat fals document to justifi the shipment of merchandis or tamper with
inventori record to conceal miss asset la rceni scheme ar more blunt the culprit in
these crime take compani asset without try to justifi their absenc
1 black p 792
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1603
most noncash larceni scheme ar not veri complic thei ar typic commit by
employe warehous personnel inventori clerk ship clerk etc with access to
inventori or suppli mani employe simpli carri compani asset awai in open view of
other employe peopl tend to assum that their friend and acquaint ar act
honestli when thei see a trust cowork take someth out of the workplac most
peopl assum that the culprit ha a legitim reason for do so
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1604 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a univers faculti member wa leav hi offic es to take a posit at a new school thi
person wa permit to take a small number of item to hi new job but certainli exceed
the intent of the school when he load tw o truck full of univers lab equip and
comput worth sever hundr thousand doll ar the perpetr simpli pack up these
stolen asset along with hi person item and drove awai
unfortun in all too mani case the cowork of the perpetr ar fulli awar that he
is steal compani asset yet thei refrain from report the crime there ar sever
reason that employe might ignor illeg conduct such as a sens of duti to their friend
a manag vs labor mental poor chann ls of commun for whistleblow or
intimid of honest employe by the thief when highrank personnel ar steal
from their compani employe often overlook the crime becaus thei fear thei will lose
their job if thei report it in some case the cowork mai be assist in the theft
exampl
a school superintend wa not onli pilfer school account but wa also steal school
asset a search of hi resid reveal a cell ar fill with school properti a number of
school employe knew or suspect the superintend wa involv in illeg deal but
he wa veri power and peopl were afraid to report him for fear of retali as a
result he wa abl to steal from the school for sever year
iron employe who steal inventori ar often highli trust within their organ
becaus these employe ar trust thei mai be given access to restrict area safe
suppli room or other area where compani asset ar kept thi access make it easi for
these employe to steal
it can be unwis for an employe to physic carri inventori and other asset off the
premis of hi compani thi practic carri with it the inher risk and potenti
embarrass of be caught redhand with stolen good on hi person some
employe avoid thi problem by mail compani asset from the victim organ to a
locat where thei can retriev them without fear of be observ
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1605
exampl
a sparepart custodian took sever thousand dollar worth of comput chip and mail
them to a compani that had no busi deal with the custodian employ he then
reclaim the merchandis as hi own by take the step of mail the stolen inventori
the fraudster allow the postal servic to unwittingli do hi dirti work for him
the fals sale
in mani case corrupt employe util outsid accomplic to help steal inventori the
fake sale is on method that depend upon an accomplic like most inventori theft the
fake sale is not complic the accomplic of the employeefraudst pretend to bui
merchandis but the employe doe not ring up the sale the accomplic take the
merchandis without pai for it to a casual observ it will appear that the transact is
a normal sale the employe bag the merchandis and mai act as though a transact is
be enter on the regist but in fact the sale is not record the accomplic mai
even pass a nomin amount of monei to the employe to complet the illus a relat
scheme occur when an employe sell merchandis to an accomplic at an unauthor
discount
employe also sometim enlist accomplic to return good that the employe ha alreadi
stolen thi is an easi wai for the employe to convert the stolen inventori into cash
asset requisit and transfer
asset requisit and other document that allow noncash asset to be move from on
locat in a compani to anoth can be us to facilit the theft of those asset
employe us intern transfer paperwork to gain access to merchandis that thei otherwis
might not be abl to handl without rais suspicion these document do not account for
miss merchandis the wai fals sale do but thei allow a person to move the asset from
on locat to anoth in the process of thi movement the thief steal the merchandis
the most basic scheme occur when an employe requisit materi for some work
relat project then make off with the materi in some case the employe simpli
overst the amount of suppli or equip it will take to complet hi work and pilfer
the excess in more ambiti scheme the employe might invent a complet fictiti
project that necessit the us of certain asset he intend to steal
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1606 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an employe of a telecommun compani us fals project document to request
approxim 100000 worth of comput chip allegedli to upgrad compani
comput know that thi type of requis on requir verbal author from anoth
sourc the employe set up an elabor phone scheme to get the project approv the
fraudster us hi knowledg of the compani phone system to forward call from four
differ line to hi own desk when the confirm call wa made it wa the
perpetr who answer the phone and author the project
dishonest employe sometim falsifi asset transfer form so thei can remov inventori
from a warehous or stockroom the fals document allow the employe to remov
merchandis from the warehous but instead of us it for a workrel purpos the
perpetr simpli take it home the obviou problem with thi type of scheme is that the
person who order the merchandis will usual be the primari suspect when it turn
up miss
exampl
a manag request merchandis from the compani warehous to be displai on a
showroom floor the piec he re quest never made it to the showroom becaus he load
them into a pickup truck and took them home in some instanc he actual took the
item in broad daylight and with the help of anoth employe thi individu thought he
wa immun from detect becaus the merchandis wa request via comput us a
manag level secur code the code wa not specif to ani on manag so there
would be no wai of know which manag had order the merchandis unfortun
for the thief the compani wa abl to record the comput termin from which the request
origin the manag had us hi own comput to make the request which led to hi
undo
purchas and receiv scheme
dishonest employe can also manipul the purchas and receiv function of a
compani to facilit the theft of inventori and other asset it might seem that ani
purchas scheme should fall under the head of fals bill which were discuss
earlier there is howev a distinct between the purchas scheme that ar classifi as
fals bill and those that ar classifi as noncash misappropri
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1607
if an employe caus hi compani to purchas merchandis that the compani doe not
need thi is a fals bill scheme the harm to the compani come in pai for asset for
which it ha no us on the other hand if the asset were intention purchas by the
compani and later misappropri by the perpetr thi is classifi as an inventori
larceni scheme here the compani lose both the valu of the merchandis and the us of
the merchandis
falsifi incom shipment
on of the most common exampl of an employe abus the purchas and receiv
function occur when a person charg with receiv good on behalf of the victim
companysuch as a warehous supervisor or receiv clerkfalsifi the record of
incom shipment if for exampl 1000 unit of a particular item ar receiv the
perpetr indic that onli 900 were receiv by mark the shipment short the
perpetr can steal the 100 unit that ar unaccount for
the obviou problem with thi kind of scheme is the fact that the receiv report doe not
match the vendor invoic which will like ca us a problem with payment in the exampl
abov if the vendor bill for 1000 unit but the account payabl voucher onli show
receipt of 900 unit of merchandis then someon will have to explain where the extra 100
unit went
some employe avoid thi problem by alter onli on copi of the receiv report the
copi that is sent to account payabl indic receipt of a full shipment so the vendor will
be paid without ani question the copi us for inventori record indic a short
shipment so that the asset on hand will equal the asset in the perpetu inventori
instead of mark shipment short the perpetr might reject portion of a shipment as
not be up to qualiti specif the perpetr then keep the substandard
merchandis rather than send it back to the supplier the result is the same as if the
shipment had been mark short
fals shipment of inventori and other asset
to conceal theft of inventori and other asset employe sometim creat fals ship
document and fals sale document to make it appear that the inventori thei take wa sold
rather than stolen see fals shipment of inventori and other asset flowchart the
document that tell the ship depart to releas inventori for deliveri is usual the
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1608 2011 fraud examin manual
pack slip by creat a fals pack slip a corrupt employe can caus inventori to be
fraudul deliv to himself or an accomplic the sale reflect in the pack slip
ar typic made to a fictiti person a fictiti compani or an accomplic of the
perpetr
on benefit of us fals ship document to misappropri inventori or other asset is
that the product is remov from the warehous or storeroom by someon other than the
perpetr the victim organ unknowingli deliv the target asset to the
perpetr of the scheme
fals pack slip allow inventori to be ship from the victim compani to the
perpetr but alon thei do not conceal the fact that inventori ha been misappropri
in order to hide the theft fraudster mai creat a fals sale on the book so it appear that
the miss inventori wa ship to a custom depend on how the victim
organ oper the perpetr mai have to creat a fals purchas order from the
buyer a fals sale order and a fals invoic along with the pack slip to creat the
illus of a sale
the result is that a fake receiv account goe into the book for the price of the
misappropri inventori obvious the buyer of the merchandis will never pai for it
how do employe deal with these fake receiv in some case the employe simpli let
the receiv ag on hi compani book until it is eventu written off as uncollect
in other instanc he might take affirm step to remov the saleand the delinqu
receiv that resultsfrom the book
exampl
an employe gener fals invoic and deliv them to the compani warehous for
ship the invoic were then mark deliv and sent to the sale offic the
perpetr remov all copi of the invoic fr om the file befor thei were bill to the
fictiti custom
anoth common wai to get rid of delinqu receiv that result from theft scheme is
to write off the receiv to account such as discount and allow bad debt expens or lost
and stolen asset
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1609
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1610 2011 fraud examin manual
instead of creat complet fictiti sale some employe underst legitim sale so
that an accomplic is bill for less than deliv the result is that a portion of the
merchandis is sold at no cost in a typic scenario a salesman fill out ship ticket
which ar forward to the warehous after the merchandis is ship the salesman
instruct the warehous employe to return the ship ticket to him for extra work
befor thei ar sent to the invoic depart the salesman then alter the ship
ticket reduc either the quantiti of merchandis sold or the price per unit sold
writeoff ar often us to conceal the theft of asset after thei have been stolen in some
case howev asset ar written off in order to make them avail for theft for instanc
an employe with the author to declar inventori obsolet can write off thi inventori as
scrap onc asset ar design as scrap it is often easier to misappropri them
fraudster mai be allow to take the useless asset for themselv bui them or sell them
to an accomplic at a greatli reduc price or simpli give the asset awai
conceal inventori shrinkag
when inventori is stolen the kei conceal issu for the perpetr is shrinkag inventori
shrinkag is the unaccountedfor reduct in the compani inventori that result from theft
for instanc assum a comput retail ha 1000 comput in stock after work on dai
an employe load 10 comput into a truck and take them home now the compani onli
ha 990 comput but sinc there is no record that the employe took 10 comput the
inventori record still show 1000 unit on hand the compani ha experienc inventori
shrinkag in the amount of 10 comput
shrinkag is on of the red flag that signal fraud the goal of the perpetr is to proce
with hi scheme undetect so it is in hi best interest to prevent anyon from look for
miss asset thi mean conceal the shrinkag that occur from asset theft
inventori and other asset ar typic track through a twostep process the first step
the perpetu inventori is a run count that record how much inventori should be on
hand when new shipment of merchandis ar receiv for instanc thi merchandis is
enter into the perpetu inventori similarli when good ar sold thei ar remov from
the perpetu inventori record in thi wai a compani track it inventori on a daytodai
basi
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1611
period a physic count of asset on hand should be made in thi process someon
actual goe through the storeroom or warehous and count everyth that the compani
ha in stock thi total is then match to the amount of asset reflect in the perpetu
inventori a variat between the physic inventori and the perpetu inventori total is
shrinkag while a certain amount of shrinkag mai be expect in ani busi larg
shrinkag total mai indic fraud
alter inventori record
on of the simplest method for conceal shrinkag is to chang the perpetu inventori
record so that it will match the physic inventori count thi is also known as a forc
reconcili of the account the perpetr simpli chang the number in the perpetu
inventori to make them match the amount of inventori on hand for exampl the
employe might credit the perpetu inventori and debit the cost of sale account to bring
the perpetu inventori number into line with the actual inventori count instead of us
correct entri to adjust the perpetu inventori some employe simpli delet or cover
up the correct total and enter new number
there ar two side to the inventori equat the perpetu inventori and the physic
inventori instead of alter the perpetu inventori a perpetr who ha access to the
record from a physic inventori count can chang those record to match the perpetu
inventori return to the comput store exampl assum the compani count it
inventori everi month and match it to the perpetu inventori the physic count should
come to 990 comput sinc that is what is actual on hand if the perpetr is someon
charg with count inventori he can simpli write down that there ar 1000 unit
on hand
fictiti sale and account receiv
when the perpetr make an adjust entri to the perpetu inventori and cost of sale
account as discuss abov there is no sale transact on the book that correspond to
these entri in order to fix thi problem a perpetr might enter a debit to account
receiv and a correspond credit to the sale account so that it appear the miss
good have been sold
of cours the problem of payment then aris becaus no on is go to pai for the good
that were sold in thi transact there ar two rout that a fraudster might take in thi
circumst the first is to charg the sale to an exist account in some case employe
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1612 2011 fraud examin manual
charg fake sale to exist receiv that ar so larg that the addit of the asset that
the perpetr ha stolen will not be notic other corrupt employe charg the sale to
account that ar alreadi ag and will soon be written off when these account ar
remov from the book the perpetr stolen inventori effect disappear the other
adjust that is typic made is a writeoff to discount and allow or bad debt expens
writeoff of inventori and other asset
write off inventori and other asset is a rel common wai for employe to remov
asset from the book befor or after thei ar stolen thi elimin the problem of
shrinkag that inher exist in everi case of noncash asset misappropri
physic pad
most method of conceal deal with alter inventori record either chang the
perpetu inventori or miscount dure the physic inventori in the altern some
employe try to make it appear that there ar more asset present in the warehous or
stockroom than there actual ar empti box or box fill with brick or other
inexpens materi for exampl mai be stack on shelv to creat the illus of extra
inventori
detect of inventori scheme
statist sampl
compani with inventori account typic have enorm popul of sourc
document statist sampl allow the fraud examin to inspect kei attribut on a
smaller portion or sampl of those document for exampl the examin mai select a
statist valid random sampl of purchas requisit to determin that all requisit in
the sampl select were properli approv statist sampl enabl the examin to
predict the occurr rate for the popul and therefor determin with some accuraci
the error rate or the potenti for fraud
other item that mai be sampl on a statist basi includ the follow
receiv report
perpetu inventori record
raw materi requisit
ship document
job cost sheet
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1613
the attribut test for on the abovement document might includ a specif date
item or locat
perpetu inventori record
unexplain entri in the perpetu record might reveal embezzl loss
ar all the reduct to the perpetu inventori record explain by sourc document
such as sale invoic approv to remov to scrap inventori or spoilag
ar all increas in perpetu record explain by sourc document such as receiv
report
ship document
inventori theft mai be uncov by answer to question such as
ar all sale properli match with a ship document
ar ani ship document not associ with a sale
is inventori disappear from storag
physic inventori count
physic inventori count can sometim give rise to inventori theft detect howev
becaus other explan satisfi inventori shortag such as shrinkag histor analysi
of inventori is usual necessari furthermor if the onli method us to detect inventori
fraud is the yearend physic count the perpetr will have had all year to devis
conceal method to circumv potenti detect
analyt review
by us an analyt review inventori fraud mai be detect becaus certain trend
becom immedi clear for exampl if the cost of good sold increas by a
disproportion amount rel to sale and no chang occur in the purchas price
quantiti purchas or qualiti of product purchas the caus of the disproportion
increas in cost of good sold might be on of two thing 1 end inventori ha been
deplet by theft or 2 someon ha been embezzl monei through a fals bill scheme
ie submit invoic and collect the payment for inventori that wa never deliv
an analyt review of all the compon part of the cost of good sold should indic to
the examin where to direct further inquiri for exampl assum that the type of
inventori purchas is the same and there is no chang in the manufactur process or
purchas price if sale and cost of sale chang from 5650987 and 2542944 to
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1614 2011 fraud examin manual
6166085 and 2981880 respect what is the data tell the examin to begin sale
have increas by 912 percent wherea cost of sale increas by 1726 percent the profit
margin ha decreas by 3 percent from 55 to 52 percent base on thi data the fraud
examin might want to look further at the compon of inventori such as begin
inventori purchas and end inventori if begin inventori wa 1207898
purchas were 2606518 and 2604972 respect and end inventori wa 894564
then an inventori matrix would look like the follow
year 1 year 2 percentag chang
begin inventori 1207898 1271472 526
purchas 2606518 2604972 006
good avail for sale 3814416 3876444 163
end inventori 1271472 894564 2964
cost of sale 2542944 2981880 1726
inventori purchas as a percentag of sale have declin from 4613 to 4225 percent
from thi exampl on can hypothes that 1 inventori purchas were purpos
increas in year on onli to be liquid in year two 2 the increas sale in year two
were unexpect and the purchas of inventori did not keep pace with the sale or 3 there
might be some fraud scheme in inventori if by interview the examin is unabl to
ascertain a reason explan such as 1 or 2 abov then further examin of the
end inventori mai be warrant
the fraud examin mai next look at the differ in the physic inventori procedur to
see if that creat a more or less accur inventori count at the end of either year on or
year two if there is no other logic explan then further investig into these and
other inventori account mai be necessari to explain the anomali occur in inventori
computergener trend analysi
the comput can be us to facilit obtain list of item with specifi attribut for
exampl in a lumberyard oper the comput can be program to list all purchas
of four by four cedar fenc post eight feet in length examin all the sourc document that
ar repres by the list by examin the sourc document for each of these
purchas the examin can plot trend to determin the occurr of the follow or
other pattern
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1615
search scheme
purchas by vendor if the same vendor is receiv favor treatment
inventori level by type and date if inventori is be purchas at it reorder point or if excess
inventori is be order
inventori ship by address if the vendor address match either an employe address or
the address of anoth vendor
cost per item if discount ar properli credit to purchas
direct labor by item if there ar excess labor hour be ad to a particular job
or item
direct materi by item if materi ar properli charg to the job too much or the
wrong materi
overhead per inventori item if overhead is be properli appli and appli onli onc
dispos then reorder if usabl inventori is be prematur design as scrap
shortag by inventori item if there is inventori theft or the reorder system is not
function
return and allow if there is an unusu high incid of return and
allow
sale allow if sale allow ar not properli credit to promot
allow
buyer if the buyer is not act within scope of author
detail audit program
the follow audit program will also be help in establish inventori control
do adequ detail written inventori instruct and procedur exist do inventori
procedur give appropri consider to the locat and arrang of
inventori
do inventori procedur give appropri consider to identif and descript
of inventori
is the method of determin inventori quantiti specifi eg weight count
is the method us for record item count adequ eg count sheet
prenumb tag
ar inventori tag us if ye 1 ar thei prenumb 2 is account for
inventori tag adequ and doe it includ control with respect to tag us unus
and void
ar adequ procedur in place to identifi inventori count ensur that all item
have been count and prevent doubl count
ar obsolet slowmov or damag inventori properli identifi and segreg
is the inventori reason identifi for proper classif in the account
record eg descript stage of complet
ar inventori count subject to 1 complet recount by person independ of the
on involv in the initi count 2 recount onli of merchandis have substanti
valu or 3 spot check by supervisori personnel
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1616 2011 fraud examin manual
ar count perform by employe whose function ar independ of the physic
custodi of inventori and recordkeep function
do proper account control and procedur exist for the exclus from inventori of
merchandis onhand that is not properti of the client eg custom merchandis
consign in
do proper account control and procedur exist for the inclus in inventori of
merchandis not onhand but the properti of the client eg merchandis in
warehous out on repair consign out
will ident inventori item in variou area be accumul to allow a tie in total
count to a summari list subsequ to the observ
is the movement of inventori adequ control eg ship and receiv
activ suspend dure the physic count to ensur a proper cutoff
ar signific differ between physic count and detail inventori record
investig befor the account and inventori record ar adjust to match the
physic count
will inventori at remot locat be count
will special count procedur or volum convers be necessari eg item
weigh on scale
how will workinprocess inventori be identifi
how will the stage of complet of workinprocess inventori be identifi
ar there ani other matter that should be note for the inventori count 2
prevent of inventori scheme
there ar four basic measur which if properli instal and implement mai help
prevent inventori fraud thei ar proper document segreg of duti includ
approv independ check and physic safeguard
proper document
the follow item should be prenumb and control
requisit
receiv report
perpetu record
2 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1617
raw materi requisit
ship document
job cost sheet
howev not all inventori requir the purchas of raw materi in these case the
proper document might take the form of prenumb and control ticket and
receipt for sale
segreg of duti
the follow duti should be handl by differ personnel
requisit of inventori
receipt of inventori
disburs of inventori
convers of inventori to scrap
receipt of proce from dispos of scrap
independ check
someon independ of the purchas or wareh function should conduct physic
observ of inventori the personnel conduct the physic observ should also be
knowledg about the inventori
physic safeguard
all merchandis should be physic guard and lock access should be limit to
author personnel onli for exampl strateg placement of secur guard mai aid in
the detect and deterr of potenti theft scheme electron method mai also be
us such as camera and surveil devic the effect of ani devic will
howev depend on the employe knowledg that physic safeguard control ar adher
to and on the type of inventori avail for misappropri
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1701
