2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets 
To conceal thefts of inventory and other assets, employees sometimes create false shipping 
documents and false sales documents to make it appear that the inventory they take was sold 
rather than stolen. (See “False Shipments of Inventory and Other Assets” flowchart.) The 
document that tells the shipping department to release inventory for delivery is usually the 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.608                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
packing slip. By creating a false packing slip, a corrupt employee can cause inventory to be 
fraudulently delivered to himself or an accomplice. The “sales” reflected in the packing slips 
are typically made to a fictitious person, a fictitious company, or an accomplice of the 
perpetrator.  
 
One benefit of using false shipping documents to misappropriate inventory or other assets is 
that the product is removed from the warehouse or storeroom by someone other than the 
perpetrator. The victim organization unknowingly delivers the targeted assets to the 
perpetrator of the scheme.  
 
False packing slips allow inventory to be shipped from the victim company to the 
perpetrator, but alone they do not conceal the fact that inventory has been misappropriated. 
In order to hide the theft, fraudsters may create a false sale on the books so it appears that 
the missing inventory was shipped to a customer. Depending on how the victim 
organization operates, the perpetrator may have to create a false purchase order from the 
“buyer,” a false sales order, and a false invoice along with the packing slip to create the 
illusion of a sale.  
 
The result is that a fake receivable account goes into the books for the price of the 
misappropriated inventory. Obviously, the “buyer” of the merchandise will never pay for it. 
How do employees deal with these fake receivables? In some cases, the employee simply lets 
the receivable age on his company’s books until it  is eventually written off as uncollectible. 
In other instances he might take affirmative steps to remove the sale—and the delinquent 
receivable that results—from the books.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee generated false invoices and delivered them to the company warehouse for 
shipping. The invoices were then marked “delivered” and sent to the sales office. The 
perpetrator removed all copies of the invoices fr om the files before they were billed to the 
fictitious customer. 
 
Another common way to get rid of delinquent receivables that result from theft schemes is 
to write off the receivables to accounts such as discounts and allowances, bad debt expense, or lost 
and stolen assets.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.609 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.610                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Instead of creating completely fictitious sales, some employees understate legitimate sales so 
that an accomplice is billed for less than delivered. The result is that a portion of the 
merchandise is sold at no cost. In a typical scenario, a salesman fills out shipping tickets, 
which are forwarded to the warehouse. After the merchandise is shipped, the salesman 
instructs the warehouse employees to return the shipping tickets to him for “extra work” 
before they are sent to the invoicing department. The salesman then alters the shipping 
tickets, reducing either the quantity of merchandise sold or the price per unit sold. 
 
Write-offs are often used to conceal the theft of assets after they have been stolen. In some 
cases, however, assets are written off in order to make them available for theft. For instance, 
an employee with the authority to declare inventory obsolete can write off this inventory as 
“scrap.” Once assets are designated as scrap, it is often easier to misappropriate them. 
Fraudsters may be allowed to take the “useless” assets for themselves, buy them or sell them 
to an accomplice at a greatly reduced price, or simply give the assets away.  
 



:


fals shipment of inventori and other asset
to conceal theft of inventori and other asset employe sometim creat fals ship
document and fals sale document to make it appear that the inventori thei take wa sold
rather than stolen see fals shipment of inventori and other asset flowchart the
document that tell the ship depart to releas inventori for deliveri is usual the
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1608 2011 fraud examin manual
pack slip by creat a fals pack slip a corrupt employe can caus inventori to be
fraudul deliv to himself or an accomplic the sale reflect in the pack slip
ar typic made to a fictiti person a fictiti compani or an accomplic of the
perpetr
on benefit of us fals ship document to misappropri inventori or other asset is
that the product is remov from the warehous or storeroom by someon other than the
perpetr the victim organ unknowingli deliv the target asset to the
perpetr of the scheme
fals pack slip allow inventori to be ship from the victim compani to the
perpetr but alon thei do not conceal the fact that inventori ha been misappropri
in order to hide the theft fraudster mai creat a fals sale on the book so it appear that
the miss inventori wa ship to a custom depend on how the victim
organ oper the perpetr mai have to creat a fals purchas order from the
buyer a fals sale order and a fals invoic along with the pack slip to creat the
illus of a sale
the result is that a fake receiv account goe into the book for the price of the
misappropri inventori obvious the buyer of the merchandis will never pai for it
how do employe deal with these fake receiv in some case the employe simpli let
the receiv ag on hi compani book until it is eventu written off as uncollect
in other instanc he might take affirm step to remov the saleand the delinqu
receiv that resultsfrom the book
exampl
an employe gener fals invoic and deliv them to the compani warehous for
ship the invoic were then mark deliv and sent to the sale offic the
perpetr remov all copi of the invoic fr om the file befor thei were bill to the
fictiti custom
anoth common wai to get rid of delinqu receiv that result from theft scheme is
to write off the receiv to account such as discount and allow bad debt expens or lost
and stolen asset
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1609
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1610 2011 fraud examin manual
instead of creat complet fictiti sale some employe underst legitim sale so
that an accomplic is bill for less than deliv the result is that a portion of the
merchandis is sold at no cost in a typic scenario a salesman fill out ship ticket
which ar forward to the warehous after the merchandis is ship the salesman
instruct the warehous employe to return the ship ticket to him for extra work
befor thei ar sent to the invoic depart the salesman then alter the ship
ticket reduc either the quantiti of merchandis sold or the price per unit sold
writeoff ar often us to conceal the theft of asset after thei have been stolen in some
case howev asset ar written off in order to make them avail for theft for instanc
an employe with the author to declar inventori obsolet can write off thi inventori as
scrap onc asset ar design as scrap it is often easier to misappropri them
fraudster mai be allow to take the useless asset for themselv bui them or sell them
to an accomplic at a greatli reduc price or simpli give the asset awai
