2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/Detailed Audit Program


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Detailed Audit Program 
The following audit program will also be helpful in establishing inventory control: 
• Do adequate, detailed, written inventory instructions and procedures exist? Do inventory 
procedures give appropriate consideration to the location and arrangement of 
inventories? 
• Do inventory procedures give appropriate consideration to identification and description 
of inventories? 
• Is the method of determining inventory quantities specified (e.g., weight, count)? 
• Is the method used for recording items counted adequate (e.g., count sheets, 
prenumbered tags)? 
• Are inventory tags used? If yes: (1) Are they prenumbered? (2) Is accounting for 
inventory tags adequate and does it include control with respect to tags used, unused, 
and voided? 
• Are adequate procedures in place to identify inventory counted, ensure that all items 
have been counted, and prevent double counting? 
• Are obsolete, slow-moving, or damaged inventories properly identified and segregated? 
• Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
records (e.g., description, stage of completion)? 
• Are inventory counts subject to (1) complete recounts by persons independent of the 
ones involved in the initial counts, (2) recounts only of merchandise having substantial 
value, or (3) spot checks by supervisory personnel? 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.616                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are counts performed by employees whose functions are independent of the physical 
custody of inventories and record-keeping functions?   
• Do proper accounting controls and procedures exist for the exclusion from inventory of 
merchandise on-hand that is not property of the client (e.g., customers’ merchandise, 
consignments in)? 
• Do proper accounting controls and procedures exist for the inclusion in inventory of 
merchandise not on-hand, but the property of the client (e.g., merchandise in 
warehouses, out on repair, consignments out)? 
• Will identical inventory items in various areas be accumulated to allow a tie in total 
counts to a summary listing subsequent to the observation? 
• Is the movement of inventory adequately controlled (e.g., shipping and receiving 
activities suspended) during the physical count to ensure a proper cut-off? 
• Are significant differences between physical counts and detailed inventory records 
investigated before the accounting and inventory records are adjusted to match the 
physical counts? 
• Will inventory at remote locations be counted? 
• Will special counting procedures or volume conversions be necessary (e.g., items 
weighed on scale)? 
• How will work-in-process inventory be identified? 
• How will the stage of completion of work-in-process inventory be identified? 
• Are there any other matters that should be noted for the inventory count? 2 
 



:


detail audit program
the follow audit program will also be help in establish inventori control
do adequ detail written inventori instruct and procedur exist do inventori
procedur give appropri consider to the locat and arrang of
inventori
do inventori procedur give appropri consider to identif and descript
of inventori
is the method of determin inventori quantiti specifi eg weight count
is the method us for record item count adequ eg count sheet
prenumb tag
ar inventori tag us if ye 1 ar thei prenumb 2 is account for
inventori tag adequ and doe it includ control with respect to tag us unus
and void
ar adequ procedur in place to identifi inventori count ensur that all item
have been count and prevent doubl count
ar obsolet slowmov or damag inventori properli identifi and segreg
is the inventori reason identifi for proper classif in the account
record eg descript stage of complet
ar inventori count subject to 1 complet recount by person independ of the
on involv in the initi count 2 recount onli of merchandis have substanti
valu or 3 spot check by supervisori personnel
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1616 2011 fraud examin manual
ar count perform by employe whose function ar independ of the physic
custodi of inventori and recordkeep function
do proper account control and procedur exist for the exclus from inventori of
merchandis onhand that is not properti of the client eg custom merchandis
consign in
do proper account control and procedur exist for the inclus in inventori of
merchandis not onhand but the properti of the client eg merchandis in
warehous out on repair consign out
will ident inventori item in variou area be accumul to allow a tie in total
count to a summari list subsequ to the observ
is the movement of inventori adequ control eg ship and receiv
activ suspend dure the physic count to ensur a proper cutoff
ar signific differ between physic count and detail inventori record
investig befor the account and inventori record ar adjust to match the
physic count
will inventori at remot locat be count
will special count procedur or volum convers be necessari eg item
weigh on scale
how will workinprocess inventori be identifi
how will the stage of complet of workinprocess inventori be identifi
ar there ani other matter that should be note for the inventori count 2
