2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)/Chapter 7 — Liquidation of Debtor’s Assets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Chapter 7 — Liquidation of Debtor’s Assets  
Part 1 of Chapter 7 deals with officers and the administration of Chapter 7 cases and spells 
out duties of the trustee. Part 2 deals with the collection, liquidation, and distribution of the 
estate’s assets. Part 3 deals with stockbroker liquidations. Part 4 deals with commodity 
broker liquidations. 
 
Chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptcy; it involves liquidation of the debtors 
assets by a trustee to pay the creditor’s claims. This allows the debtor to get a court order 
under which some or all of his debts may be eliminated. It involves the liquidation of assets 
that are not exempt by state law. Personal bankruptcy does not eliminate taxes, fines, 
alimony, child support, and certain student loans. 
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1306                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A petition for liquidation under Chapter 7 may be filed by any entity (e.g., any individual, 
corporation, partnership, business trust, etc.), but a Chapter 7 case filed by an individual 
debtor may be dismissed (or converted to a case under Chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor’s 
consent) if granting relief under Chapter 7 would constitute an abuse. The means test is used 
to determine whether the Chapter 7 filing is presumptively abusive. Under this test, the 
trustee or any creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a Chapter 7 filing if the debtor’s income 
is greater than the state median income. 
 
Also, a Chapter 7 debtor cannot receive a discharge if a prior discharge was received within 8 
years of the new filing. 
 



:


chapter 7 liquid of debtor asset
part 1 of chapter 7 deal with offic and the administr of chapter 7 case and spell
out duti of the truste part 2 deal with the collect liquid and distribut of the
estat asset part 3 deal with stockbrok liquid part 4 deal with commod
broker liquid
chapter 7 is the most common type of bankruptci it involv liquid of the debtor
asset by a truste to pai the creditor claim thi allow the debtor to get a court order
under which some or all of hi debt mai be elimin it involv the liquid of asset
that ar not exempt by state law person bankruptci doe not elimin tax fine
alimoni child support and certain student loan
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11306 2011 fraud examin manual
a petit for liquid under chapter 7 mai be file by ani entiti eg ani individu
corpor partnership busi trust etc but a chapter 7 case file by an individu
debtor mai be dismiss or convert to a case under chapter 11 or 13 with the debtor
consent if grant relief under chapter 7 would constitut an abus the mean test is us
to determin whether the chapter 7 file is presumpt abus under thi test the
truste or ani creditor can bring a motion to dismiss a chapter 7 file if the debtor incom
is greater than the state median incom
also a chapter 7 debtor cannot receiv a discharg if a prior discharg wa receiv within 8
year of the new file
