2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Bankruptcy Crime Statutes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Bankruptcy Crime Statutes 
Bankruptcy crimes that are committed during the course of a bankruptcy proceeding, or in 
contemplation of a bankruptcy proceeding, are contained in federal statutes. They are carried 
out through the filing of a bankruptcy petition either to accomplish the purpose of the crime 
or to cover up another crime that has already been perpetrated.  
 
Although the Bankruptcy Code is contained within Title 11, U.S. Code, bankruptcy crimes 
appear within Title 18, U.S. Code, sections 151 through 155. Section 152 is the most 
comprehensive of the individual bankruptcy crime statutes. To constitute and be proved as a 
federal crime, bankruptcy crimes must have been committed during the pendency of a bankruptcy 
proceeding, with the defendant’s knowledge, and with a fraudulent intent to defeat the bankruptcy laws. 
The FBI investigates bankruptcy crimes and the U.S. Attorney’s office prosecutes them.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1315 
It is no defense to these crimes that the creditors have actual knowledge of concealed assets 
or that the concealment was not from all creditors, and it is no defense that the defendant 
returned the estate’s assets, though such facts might mitigate damages. 
 
Generally, the penalty for each bankruptcy offense is a fine (of up to $500,000 in the case of 
bankruptcy fraud committed by an organization) or imprisonment for not more than five 
years, or both. The statute of limitations does not run until the fraud is detected or the 
debtor receives a discharge or is denied a discharge pursuant to the Bankruptcy Code.  
 
The following sections set out the bankruptcy crime statutes as well as related criminal 
statutes that frequently arise in bankruptcy cases.  
 



:


bankruptci crime statut
bankruptci crime that ar commit dure the cours of a bankruptci proceed or in
contempl of a bankruptci proceed ar contain in feder statut thei ar carri
out through the file of a bankruptci petit either to accomplish the purpos of the crime
or to cover up anoth crime that ha alreadi been perpetr
although the bankruptci code is contain within titl 11 us code bankruptci crime
appear within titl 18 us code section 151 through 155 section 152 is the most
comprehens of the individu bankruptci crime statut to constitut and be prove as a
feder crime bankruptci crime must have been commit dure the pendenc of a bankruptci
proceed with the defend knowledg and with a fraudul intent to defeat the bankruptci law
the fbi investig bankruptci crime and the us attornei offic prosecut them
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11315
it is no defens to these crime that the creditor have actual knowledg of conceal asset
or that the conceal wa not from all creditor and it is no defens that the defend
return the estat asset though such fact might mitig damag
gener the penalti for each bankruptci offens is a fine of up to 500000 in the case of
bankruptci fraud commit by an organ or imprison for not more than five
year or both the statut of limit doe not run until the fraud is detect or the
debtor receiv a discharg or is deni a discharg pursuant to the bankruptci code
the follow section set out the bankruptci crime statut as well as relat crimin
statut that frequent aris in bankruptci case
