2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


COVERT EXAMINATIONS 
 
A covert operation  is designed to obtain evidence by use of agents whose true role is 
undisclosed to the target. There are two major forms of covert operations: undercover operations  
and surveillance operations.  
 
Several distinctions define these types of covert operations. Undercover operations seek to 
develop evidence directly from people involved in the offense through the use of disguise 
and deceit. Rather than waiting for the information to come by other routes, there is a 
conscious decision to seek it out. In contrast, surveillance operations use the skills of 
observation to determine activity of individuals. The surveillance operation is designed to 
gather information.  
 
Covert operations require the highest degree of skill and planning. Used in a timely manner 
with great care, a covert operation can produce results that cannot be achieved in any other 
way. Used incorrectly or handled badly, covert operations can lead to embarrassment, 
serious financial liability, injury, and even death.  
 
Disguise and deceit in undercover operations are well recognized by the courts as a 
legitimate function of public and private law enforcement, provided the undercover 
operation is based on sufficient probable cause. Covert operations cannot be conducted as 
“fishing expeditions.” Justification for conducting the operation must be legally sound and 
defensible and must not violate a person’s reasonable expectation of privacy.  
 
Prior to an undercover operation, it is essential that the basis for the operation be committed 
to writing, preferably in a memo (see “Re port Writing”). The memorandum should clearly 
state: 
• The information upon which the covert operation will be based 
• The information that is expected to be gained from the operation 
• The identities of suspects, if known 
• Operatives under your care, custody, or control 
  
A fraud examiner is undercover when he officially abandons his identity as an examiner and 
adopts one designed to obtain information from people who do not realize his true identity. 
The assumed identity might involve only the adoption of another name or it might require 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an elaborate cover. The aim should be to avoid being compromised, to minimize danger to 
the fraud examiner, and to ensure ultimate success of the operation. 
 
Information sought might include the location of outlets for stolen goods, the subject’s 
methods of operation, detailed personal data on all subjects, and any other relevant 
information. Information should be developed with care to avoid alerting the targets or their 
associates. Only those people who need to know should be informed of the undercover 
investigation.  
 
 
Establishing an Identity 
A cover story must be fabricated to conceal the true identity of the fraud examiner. The 
story should help the examiner gain the subject’s confidence but it should rarely, if ever, be 
wholly fictitious. The examiner should be from a city with which he is familiar, but not from 
the home city of the subject. Arrangements should be made to have key people in the 
fictitious history corroborate the undercover examiner’s claims. 
 
Particular attention should be paid to items carried by the undercover examiner, such as 
pocketbooks, watches, rings, tokens, suitcases, ticket stubs, miscellaneous papers, matches, 
letters, and sums of money. Documents and identity cards should show the appropriate 
amount of wear and tear. The fraud examiner should be able to explain how each item came 
into his possession. 
 
There should be a natural contact between the undercover examiner and the subject. The 
background story should contain elements that will bring the suspect and the examiner 
together without any contrived effort. A mutual interest in hobbies, sports, and other leisure 
activities can provide an opportunity for getting acquainted. The examiner should not pose 
as an authority on a subject unless totally qualified. Many times an examiner’s admitted lack 
of knowledge—but an interest in—a given subj ect will help make the subject feel important 
and not threatened. 
 
According to Timothy J. Walsh, a security expert, the following situations are those in which 
covert operations have traditionally worked well. 
• There is reliable information about criminal activity or asset losses, but insufficient detail 
for prevention or apprehension.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.303 
• Losses are known to be occurring in an area, but there is no information as to how they 
are occurring or who is responsible. 
• It is desirable to gather information concerning personal relationships or to identify the 
contacts made with or by certain people.  
• It is desirable to compare actual practices with supposed or required practices.  
• It is important to obtain information in an indirect manner from people believed to 
possess it.  
 
Covert operations should be used when there is no other practical way to obtain  
necessary information.  
 
 
Objectives 
According to Paul O’Connell in an article for Security Management, one of the first steps in 
initiating an undercover operation is to identify the objectives of the investigation. The 
objectives must specifically identify what the operation is designed to discover, such as the 
identity of the fraudulent worker responsible for a specific crime. 
 
The specific objectives of a covert operation depend on the type of investigation being 
conducted. The objectives in the surveillance of a warehouse would not be the same as those 
in surveillance designed to determine if Collins is receiving a kickback from Nagel. However, 
all covert operations have similar general objectives: 
• To obtain evidence of a past, current, or future crime. This evidence usually bears on the 
culpability of individuals. If an operative in a covert investigation is posing as a thief, for 
example, actual thieves might confess their involvement to him, unaware that their 
conversations were being recorded. 
• To identify those engaged in possible illegal activity. If, for example, cash is missing, a covert 
investigation or surveillance might disclose who is committing the offense. Thereafter, 
the covert operation might be discontinued, and the evidence gathered by more 
traditional means.  
• To recover illegal gains. If an accounts payable clerk has been stealing to purchase an 
automobile, locating the car might permit civil litigation to recover it.  
• To identify co-conspirators. If an employee is in collusion with another employee, a covert 
operation might lead to the identity of the second individual.  
                                                 
1 O’Connell, E. Paul. “Is a Ruse the Best Route?” Security Management. December 1995, pp. 26-30. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To identify the modus operandi. Again, in the case of missing goods, the identity of the 
perpetrator might be known or suspected, but the internal control deficiencies 
permitting the theft might be unknown. A covert operation might discover the  
missing link. 
 
 
Problems in Covert Operations 
In addition to the legal problems a fraud examiner might encounter, a covert operation is the 
most costly and risky work an examiner can undertake. Such operations consume great 
amounts of human resources. They should be used only with extreme care, and as a last 
resort. If the case can be made any other way, the fraud examiner should stay away from 
covert operations.  
 
There are laws governing surreptitious audio and/or video recordings. In some jurisdictions, 
it is unlawful to make an audio recording or to listen in on a conversation unless you are a 
party to that conversation. In other jurisdictions, it is lawful to record any conversation as 
long as one party to the conversation consents.  
 
Recording conversations with eavesdropping devices (supersensitive microphones that listen 
from behind closed doors, for example) usually is illegal. People behind closed doors have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Videotaping or photographing someone in a public place 
is legal, if the person does not have a “reas onable expectation” of privacy in such a place. 
For instance, a restroom or locker room might be a “public place,” but people have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy that they will not be photographed. If operatives or 
witnesses are used to record telephone or other conversations, written consent should  
be obtained. Sample forms used for this purpose can be found in the “Reporting  
Standards” section. 
 
Although it is generally not a crime to videotape a person in public if the tape is not to be 
used for commercial purposes (i.e., you will not be selling the tape), if any part of the 
person’s conversation or words are picked up on tape, then the tape is subject to all of the 
laws and rules regarding the recording of conversations. It’s as if you were recording the 
person on the telephone; you may be prohibited fr om recording the conversation if you are 
not a party to it or you do not have the person’s consent. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.305 
In summary, the laws governing audio and video recordings can be confusing and complex. 
Please refer to the chapter on “Individual Rights” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners 
Manual  for more information, and contact a lawyer if you have any doubts. 
 
 
Entrapment 
Entrapment occurs when law enforcement officers or government agents induce a person to 
commit a crime that he is not previously disposed to commit. Entrapment poses the biggest 
legal problem in covert operations, particularly in undercover operations. It is imperative 
that the operation be properly predicated. Again, covert operations must not be used for 
“fishing expeditions.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
A store owner was concerned because his inventory costs were unusually high in relation to sales. 
He hired a private investigator to pose as a cont ract driver and deliver and pick up merchandise 
to and from the store. The investigator proceeded to offer kickbacks to all employees in the 
shipping department if they would allow him to leave without si gning for the merchandise. One 
employee took the bait, and was subsequently arrested for theft. The case was thrown out 
because of entrapment. The courts ruled that there was no reason to believe, simply because of a 
high sales cost, that merchandise was being stolen. Furthermore, the investigator had no suspect 
in mind; he was simply “fishing.”  
 
 
Surveillance 
Surveillance is the planned observation of people, places, or objects. It is normally 
concerned with people. Places and objects observed are usually incidental to the primary 
interest of gathering information about certain people. 
 
There are two general types of surveillance: mobile and fixed. Mobile surveillance is 
sometimes referred to as “tailing” or “shadowing ,” and fixed surveillance as a “stakeout” or 
“plant.” Mobile surveillance can be done on foot or by vehicle and is carried out when 
people being observed move from location to location. A fixed surveillance is used when a 
person or activity remains in place, although the observers might move from one vantage 
point to another in the immediate area. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Surveillance, whether by foot or vehicle, is predominantly an exercise in common sense, 
skill, tact, and ingenuity on the part of the observer. Carefully planned and properly executed 
surveillance can be of tremendous value in an investigation; conversely, lack of preparation, 
poor timing, and unsound surveillance practices can destroy an otherwise good case. 
 
Surveillance can be used to locate residences, businesses, or other places of interest to  
the investigation, and places where criminal activity is conducted. It can also produce 
important evidence concerning the scope and nature of a person’s activities. Surveillance 
activities must be carefully recorded. Detailed notes and logs, film and video (often with 
special lenses and light sources), tape recordings, and miniature electronic listening devices 
must be used appropriately. 
 
Methods of Surveillance 
During loose surveillance, targets need not be kept under constant observation. The surveillance 
should be discontinued if the person becomes suspicious. In close surveillance, subjects are kept 
under observation continuously even if they appear to become suspicious. 
 
Circumstances might require a change from a loose to a close surveillance. Pre-planning 
helps, but the examiner must observe and interpret the act or circumstances to decide what 
tactic to employ. If the plan calls for loose surveillance until the completion of a specified 
act, or until a meeting with another person, after which the subject is to be put under close 
surveillance or apprehended, the observer must determine when the specific incident has 
taken place. 
 
Preparation 
The observer’s attire should fit in with the ar ea and/or group. Dress should be conservative, 
unless conservative dress is not appropriate for the area. Attire should not be loud or flashy 
so that if the subject notes the observer, he will be less likely to form any lasting impression. 
Minor changes in outer clothing or hand-carried  items might alter the overall impression and 
help prevent recognition by the subject. 
 
Two or more observers working together need complete agreement about the surveillance 
techniques and schedule. Discreet signals will help each observer understand any given 
situation. Planning is essential, but the observers’ adaptability and ingenuity are vital. 
Observers should be chosen for both aptitude and resourcefulness. They must have poise, 
patience, and endurance. Prior to the surveillance, the observer should prepare and 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.307 
document a cover story that will stand up under scrutiny. This cover story should provide 
the observer with a reasonable excuse for being in the area and for doing what has to be 
done there. 
 
Electronic Equipment 
Use of electronic surveillance equipment should be considered. For surveillance on foot, 
transmitting and receiving devices can easily be hidden on the person without arousing 
suspicion. Transmitters can be concealed in packages, briefcases, or on the person. Light-
 gathering binoculars and/or metascope equipment for night surveillance should be used if 
necessary. See the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for a description of legal 
electronic monitoring techniques. 
 
Basic Precautions 
An observer should refrain from making abrupt, unnatural moves that could attract 
attention. Disguises such as false beards are impractical, hard to maintain, and easily 
detectable. The observer should not look directly into the subject’s eyes. Inexperienced 
observers must overcome the tendency to believe that they have been “made” (identified) 
because the subject glances at them several times. The geography of the area where 
surveillance is to take place should be studied carefully. The observer should know the 
location of culs-de-sac or dead-end streets or alleys to avoid being trapped or discovered. A 
suspicious subject might suddenly reverse course, enter a dead-end street, board and 
suddenly depart from public transportation, or engage in a variety of other evasive actions. 
The observer can counter these strategies by following approved surveillance techniques.  
 
Techniques of Foot Surveillance 
One-Person Surveillance 
One-person surveillance is best for a fixed sur veillance. If a moving one-person surveillance 
must be used, the observer should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep 
fairly close. Crowd and street conditions will dictate the appropriate distance. When the 
subject turns a corner in an uncrowded area the observer should continue crossing the 
intersecting street. By glancing up the street in the subject’s direction, the subject’s position 
and actions can be noted. 
 
In a crowded area, surveillance distances might be decreased. Unless the subject is standing 
just around the corner, surveillance can be continued from the same side of the street. Do 
not turn a corner immediately behind the subject. When operating across the street from the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject, circumstances will dictate whether to operate forward, to the rear, or abreast of the 
target. The observer should be abreast of the target when he turns a corner to observe any 
contact with individuals or entry into a building. 
 
Two-Person Surveillance 
In the “A-B” surveillance technique, the observer directly behind the target is known as the 
“A” observer. A follows the target, and B follows  A either on the same side or from across 
the street. When both observers operate from the same side of the street, and the subject 
turns a corner, A continues in the original direction and crosses the intersecting street. From 
a vantage point, A signals the correct moves to B. When B is operating across the street and 
the subject turns a corner to the right, B will cross the street behind the subject and take up 
the A position. This move should be prearranged. No signals should be necessary. All visual 
signals should be discreet and consistent with the environment. Should the subject turn to 
the left and cross the street toward B, B should drop back to avoid meeting the subject. B 
should keep A in sight to observe signals indicating his next move. 
 
Three-Person Surveillance 
The “A-B-C” technique of surveillance is intended to keep two sides of the subject covered. 
A follows the subject. B follows A and concentrates on keeping him rather than the subject 
in sight. The normal position for B is behind A. C normally operates across the street from 
the subject and slightly to his rear, enabling C to observe the subject without turning his 
head. Variations, such as having both B and C ac ross the street or all three of the observers 
behind the subject on the same side of the street, might be necessary because of crowded 
conditions or traffic. In this technique, if the subject turns a corner, A continues in the 
original direction, crosses the intersecting street, and then signals instructions to the other 
observers from that vantage point. Either B or C can be given the A position and A might 
take up the original C position and continue his observation of the subject from across  
the street. 
 
In another variation of this technique, both A and B might continue in the original direction 
and cross the street. A signals C to take up the A position. B then recrosses the street and 
assumes his former B position. A assumes the C position. In the third situation, when C 
notices that the subject is about to turn a corner, C signals both A and B what positions  
to assume. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.309 
Other Techniques 
There are other ways to lessen the chance of an observer being made. First, by either pre-
 arrangement or signal, the two or more observers can change places with each other. This is 
commonly referred to as the leap-frog method.  
 
Progressive surveillance is used when extreme caution is necessary. With this technique, the 
subject is followed a certain distance and the surveillance is discontinued and the time noted. 
The next day another observer picks up the subject at the time and place where the 
surveillance was previously discontinued, and again follows the subject for a short distance. 
This continues day after day until the surveillance is completed. 
 
Techniques of Vehicle Surveillance 
General 
Vehicle surveillance demands additional preparations. A dependable vehicle similar to types 
commonly found in the area where the surveillance is to take place must be used. This can 
be a panel truck, automobile, or a large truck or trailer. The license should be of the state and 
county where the surveillance will take place. If more than one vehicle is to be used, two-way 
radio or cellular telephone conversation is usually necessary. Consideration should be given 
to gasoline, water, first-aid equipment, and road-map requirements. 
 
Whenever possible, combining foot and vehicular surveillance is an advantage. The 
observers will likely remain more alert. When a subject parks his vehicle and remains in it, an 
observer on foot can better monitor the subject’s actions and those of passersby.  
 
As in foot surveillance, vehicular surveillance requires inconspicuous actions. Observers 
should generally stay in the same lane as the target to avoid having to make turns from the 
wrong lane. If the situation allows, observers should change direction, perhaps going around 
a block in order to break continuity before the suspect becomes suspicious. It is difficult at 
night for the observers to be sure they are following the right vehicle. The target’s car can be 
kept in sight better if it is distinctive. If the opportunity arises, reflective tape can be attached 
to the rear of the subject’s car. The dome light  of the observer’s car should be disconnected 
so that the light will not show when a door is opened. Headlights and license-plate lights can 
be wired to allow them to be turned on or off. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One-Vehicle Surveillance 
When one vehicle is used, it must remain close enough to allow the observers to monitor the 
subject’s actions, but far enough behind to avoid detection. When a subject’s car stops, one 
observer should follow his actions on foot. The subject normally will not expect to be tailed 
by a person on foot while he is using his car. When the subject turns a corner, the observers 
can make one of two possible moves. They can continue in the original direction, cross the 
intersecting street, and make a U-turn; the subject will take little interest in a car turning into 
the street behind him coming from the opposite direction. An alternative would be to 
continue in the original direction, cross the intersecting street, and continue around  
the block.  
 
Two-Vehicle Surveillance 
This technique uses two vehicles to follow the subject at different distances on the same 
street, as in the “A-B” method of foot surveillance. This technique can be varied by having 
one vehicle going in the same direction as the subject on a parallel street while receiving 
radio-transmitted directions from the observers directly behind the subject. This technique is 
more flexible because the two vehicles can change places from time to time. 
 
Fixed Surveillance 
A fixed surveillance, or stakeout, is used when the subject remains stationary. The observer 
can move around for closer observation. When one observer is detailed to watch a place 
with more than one exit, he might have to move about considerably. When preparing for a 
stakeout, the base of operations should be well planned. It might be a store, apartment, 
house, automobile, or truck. A thorough — but cautious—area reconnaissance should be 
conducted. Necessary equipment should be readily available, such as binoculars, electronic 
investigative aids, cameras, and sound recording devices.  
 
Satellite Surveillance 
Although fraud examiners will rarely need it, satellite data are now available. For a relatively 
small amount, an examiner can buy detailed images from nearly anywhere in the world. 
 
Plant security lends itself to satellite imagery. In addition to providing much of the same 
information as conventional satellite photographs, multispectral imagery can detect muddy 
ground, paths taken by people and vehicles, and other information that might help identify 
potential security problems. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.311 
Satellite imagery can be useful in surveillance if it is combined with more traditional types of 
photographic intelligence. This is especially true for large estates or industrial sites where 
aerial photography is prohibited. It also can be beneficial in a covert operation. 
 
Satellite imagery can help to determine ways to penetrate a site, develop a map of the 
grounds, and identify important areas. In addition, satellite imagery can be used to 
investigate areas that are too remote, expensive, or dangerous to send operatives. 
 
Buying satellite imagery is simple if the latitude and longitude of the target is known. The 
products range from photographic prints of the image to magnetic tapes of geographically 
corrected data. Prints, not much different from the enlargements from a film processor, are 
usually the cheapest product. While they don’t allow sophisticated enhancement, they only 
require a magnifying glass to examine.  
 
The next most expensive product is a transparency or a negative. It allows the interpreter to 
make prints and is convenient for exhibiting with an overhead projector. Stereograms are 
pairs of images that show the same object from slightly different positions and provide a 
three-dimensional view when looked at with stereoscopic glasses. They are available as either 
prints or transparencies. Magnetic tape is the digitized version of the images. A particularly 
sophisticated analysis of the target is possible with magnetic tape. 
 
Night Surveillance Equipment 
Basically, there are two types of night viewing devices: active  and passive. The active type puts 
out its own light source, an infrared beam, which is visible to the user through the infrared 
scope that is part of the unit. The advantage of the active type of night viewing device is that 
the user can see in total darkness. Disadvantages include limited range and the fact that the 
infrared beam is visible to anyone looking through an infrared scope or through a passive 
night viewing device. 
 
The passive type of night viewing device electronically amplifies whatever existing light is in 
the environment, such as moonlight or sky glow. This is why such units sometimes are 
referred to as “starlight scopes.” Night viewing  devices have been in use since 1969. Their 
primary purpose is to allow the observation of events occurring more than one block away at 
night. Night viewing devices, with adapters, can be attached to the front of cameras to 
obtain evidence that will stand up in court. Television videotapes, movies, and still photos 
can all be obtained using night viewing devices. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources and Informants 
Sources and informants both serve the same purpose—to provide information to help 
develop a case. However, there are notable differences between confidential sources and 
confidential informants. The terms should not be used interchangeably.  
 
A confidential source  furnishes information as a result of occupation or profession and has no 
culpability in the alleged offense. For example, confidential sources might include barbers, 
attorneys, accountants, and law enforcement personnel. A confidential informant  has a direct or 
indirect involvement in the matter under investigation, and might be culpable. The 
distinction between the two is their involvement in the offense. Informants can pose 
treacherous legal issues for the examiner.  
 
Tom Melsheimer, a former federal prosecutor, suggests from his experience that no piece of 
evidence is quite as convincing to a jury as a secretly photographed or recorded conversation 
that an informant can obtain firsthand. This information is generally accepted as a “slam 
dunk” for a criminal prosecutor, because there is  little that a white-collar criminal can dispute 
when caught in the act of a fraud. For this reason, the use of informants is likely to increase 
in future fraud investigations. 
 
Types of Informants 
In the book Criminal Investigations, authors Paul B. Weston and Kenneth M. Wells identify 
several different types of informants: the basic lead, the participant, the covert, and the 
accomplice/witness. 
  
Basic Lead Informants 
This type of informant supplies information to the police about illicit activities that they have 
encountered. The reasons that the informant decides to supply information are varied; some 
informants simply want to “do their part” to stop an unscrupulous activity, while others are 
interested in harming the criminals against whom they are informing. For instance, many 
informants in the drug, prostitution, or illegal gambling areas are involved in those areas as 
well and intend to eliminate some of their competition. Whatever the reason, these 
informants’ only role in a covert investigation is to supply law enforcement with 
information. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.313 
Participant Informants 
The participant informant is directly involved in gathering preliminary evidence in the 
investigation. The informant in this instance not only supplies an investigation with 
information, but the informant is also involved in setting up a “sting” operation, initiating 
contact with the criminal for arrest purposes. A participant informant is just what the name 
suggests—a participant in the investigation of fraudulent or criminal activity.  
 
Covert Informants 
A covert informant serves the same basic function that any other type of informant does by 
supplying information to authorities on criminal behavior. The difference in this category is 
that a covert informant is one who has been embedded in a situation or scenario for a 
number of years and is called upon only sporadically for tip-offs and leads. These types of 
informants are often referred to as moles, because of the nature of their insulated situation as 
inside sources. Weston and Wells identify two instances in which covert informants are 
commonly used: in organized crime and hate-extremist group investigations, covert 
informants are often culled to get information about upcoming criminal activities by  
the groups. 
 
Accomplice/Witness Informants 
The accomplice/witness informant is called upon by investigators quite often to provide 
information on criminal activity. The distinction in this category is that if the 
accomplice/witness informant were not feeding information to investigators, he would be 
liable to be prosecuted for the same offense. The accomplice informant is often persuaded 
to “spill the beans” on a co-conspirator in exchange for leniency in the prosecution phase of 
the investigation. 
 
Objectives of Source and Informant Information 
There are three essential procedures when using sources and informants. First, to keep the 
person’s identity as confidential as possible. Second, to independently verify the information 
provided by the source or informant. Third, to develop witness and documentary evidence 
from independently verified information.  
 
If the confidential source or informant has provided documents, names of potential 
witnesses, or other evidence, all reasonable steps must be taken to protect the identity of that 
source. Care should be taken to ensure that questioning of other witnesses is done in a 
manner that does not reveal its origin. This can usually be accomplished through the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
phrasing of questions. For example, Mary Rodriguez De La Garza furnished confidential 
information about Linda Reed Collins. When the examiner confronts Collins, he does not 
want her to know that he has talked to Ms. De La Garza. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
“Ms. Collins, someone told me you were taking kickbacks.” 
 
RIGHT 
“Ms. Collins, I have information indicating  you are taking money from a vendor.” 
 
You have made the confrontation direct, but you have not revealed the origin of your 
information. If Collins presses to learn how you knew: 
 
Ms. Collins: 
“Who did you get that information from?”  
 
Examiner: 
“Documents I have from the company’s records, plus other inquiries conducted in this matter.” 
 
In this example, if need be, the examiner would display the evidence from witnesses and 
documents that would not reveal the source or informant’s identity. The information from 
the source or informant is basically useless unless the examiner can verify its authenticity and 
independently corroborate it. Suppose a source furnishes the examiner with copies of 
accounts payable documents showing that Bailey Books Incorporated’s cost of materials has 
increased by 16 percent since Linda Reed Collins took over the account at the Orion 
Corporation. This kind of evidence would corroborate the source’s story. If a source told the 
examiner that Collins frequently had drinks with Jim Nagel, the account representative for 
Orion, the examiner would want to find out some way to verify this report. The third 
objective when using sources is to develop the witness’s information and other evidence so 
that it makes a cohesive case.  
 
Recruitment of Sources and Informants 
Fraud examiners should recall the need to develop sources. Business and financial institution 
executives, law enforcement and other governmental personnel, medical and educational 
professionals, and internal and external auditors are good contacts for fraud examiners.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.315 
The examiner should make contacts in the community well in advance of needing 
information; this is simply good public relations. If the fraud examiner receives an allegation 
and needs confidential information, perhaps a source cultivated earlier can assist. Sources 
need to feel confident that they can share information without being compromised. In 
theory, the source will never have to testify; he has no firsthand knowledge, his information 
comes from a witness or document. 
 
The examiner might also meet sources when tracking leads during a specific investigation. 
He might interview a stockbroker from whom the target purchased stock who does not want 
his identity revealed. The examiner should not encourage a person to provide confidential 
information, but rather try to get reports on the record. But if the source’s information must 
be kept confidential, abide by that promise.  
 
Active recruitment of informants is generally not desirable; it might appear untoward to a 
jury. It is better to encourage an informant to come forward. It is desirable to develop an 
informant relationship, but this situation must be handled carefully. The examiner must 
clearly document an adequate predication for informant’s involvement. The most serious 
question is the culpability of the informant. There have been cases where the informant is 
guiltier than the target. The court might rule that the informant’s information cannot be 
introduced.  
 
Motives of Sources and Informants 
Sources 
In some instances (but not many), the source might want money or other consideration for 
furnishing information. The examiner should not offer any compensation. It is better to 
have the source request it. This is to avoid any allegation of misconduct on the part of the 
examiner for paying for information. Sources have their reasons for informing. It might be 
the sense of importance that comes from being involved or a chance to play “detective.” In 
other cases, the source might have a grudge against the target. Other reasons include a 
feeling of moral responsibility to report information. Perhaps more than any other reason, a 
source will furnish information because he likes and trusts the examiner and wants to help. 
 
Informants 
Informants, especially incidental ones, commonly want something in return for their 
information. They take the attitude that their involvement has personal risk, and they want 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to be paid for their “trouble.” The informant is likely to be predisposed to sell information 
to the highest bidder.  
 
Many informants—perhaps the majority—are unstable. As often as not, an informant’s 
motivation is to “get” the target, not because  of any sense of morality, but because the 
informant and the target are closely involved. In the case of drug dealing, for example, an 
informant might furnish information because the target is the competition. In other cases, 
the informant is motivated by a sense of self-importance. He is a “big man”; people take  
him seriously. 
 
Probably the most common reason informants supply information is because they are 
involved in the offense, and by furnishing information on the target (which is commonly 
false), they can diffuse suspicion from their own activities. In many instances, the examiner 
initially does not know the truth about the informant.  
 
The fraud examiner must also be aware of the overzealous informant. Melsheimer cautions 
that most of the recently catalogued cases concerning the abuse of informants were the 
result of “involved informants who are private citizens, self-motivated to satisfy their law 
enforcement sponsors at virtually any cost.” In an attempt to ingratiate themselves to 
investigators, the informant will often engage in unscrupulous activities to provide the 
information they think the investigators are looking for. The fraud examiner must lay out the 
ground rules for the informant before beginning this type of investigation or risk the 
embarrassment (and punishment) that a less-than-truthful informant can provide.  
 
Legal Considerations 
As noted, dealing with sources and informants is fraught with legal pitfalls. The examiner 
should be circumspect in all interactions with sources and informants. The examiner might 
be able to trust a source, but rarely an informant. Always document contacts with sources 
and informants in case of problems.  
 
Many jurisdictions guarantee the accused the right to confront his accuser. That is an 
absolute right of the accused; it is not possible to cross-examine someone who lurks behind 
a cloak of secrecy. The examiner will usually not be able to testify to what a source or 
informant said because of the “hearsay” rule. The witness can testify only to what he knows, 
not what someone else has said.  
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.317 
If a decision is made to pay an informant or source, the payment should be made in cash and 
a receipt should be secured. If the source will not sign a receipt, do not pay. There have been 
numerous instances where a receipt was not obtained and the informant subsequently denied 
receiving funds or challenged the amount. The examiner then has to defend himself without 
proof; indeed, some investigators have been accused of having embezzled the payments. 
Payments should only be on a COD basis. The information should be furnished and verified 
before turning over any money. If not, the examiner might become the victim of a scam.  
 
Entrapment is sometimes raised as a criminal defense. This is especially true when the 
informant is doing things at the behest of law enforcement. The defense is that the target is 
innocent, but was unlawfully lured into a crime that he otherwise would not have 
committed. This can best be overcome by ensuring that the source or informant only gathers 
information and plays a limited role in the case.  
 
Reporting Contacts 
It is recommended that all contact with informants and sources be reported on a 
memorandum of interview, although the confidential source or informant’s identity should 
not be included in the report. Symbols to denote the informant’s identity should be used. It 
is further recommended that sources be preceded with an “S” followed by a unique identifier 
(i.e., source #1 would be “S-1”; source #2 would be “S-2”). The symbols for informants 
would then be “I-1” and “I-2.”  
 
As a general rule, disclosure of the identities of sources and informants should be on a strict 
need-to-know basis. For that reason, the person’s identity should be maintained in a secure 
file with limited access and cross-indexed by his symbol number. The reliability of the 
source, if known, and whether the person is in a position to furnish relevant information 
should both be noted in writing. 
 
 EXAMPLE 
“A source of unknown reliability, but in a position to furnish relevant  
information (hereinafter referred to as S-1), advised as follows:” 
OR 
“An informant of known reliability and in a position to furnish relevant information 
(hereinafter referred to as I-2) advised as follows:” 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.318   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The fraud examiner is not in a position to promise leniency to people involved in the 
commission of a crime or tort. To do so is serious misconduct and a violation of the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics. Promises of leniency can only 
come from the prosecutor or the courts. The examiner might truthfully tell the informant 
that his cooperation will be made known to the authorities, and that people who cooperate 
are generally treated better.  
 
For reasons previously discussed, it is best not to use sources and informants in ongoing 
crimes as “double agents.” Such action is inherently risky and places the examiner in the 
position of having to defend the actions of the source or informant, actions that, in most 
cases, the examiner cannot control. This leaves the case open to attack during legal 
proceedings. If it appears critical that the source be used as an agent, get the approval of the 
prosecutor and/or attorney before proceeding.  
 
Promises of Confidentiality 
Fraud examiners are not in a position to offer unqualified confidentiality. Therefore, any 
promises made to an informant or source should be qualified. In the case of an examiner 
who is employed by a governmental agency, there might be an absolute duty not to hold 
sources and informants in confidence. In many law enforcement agencies, an investigator 
might not have informants or sources who are unknown to the agency. Governmental 
agencies also regularly share information on criminal investigations with prosecutors, 
including the identity of the source of information. The same regulations and considerations 
could govern business entities.  
 
EXAMPLE 
During the examination of Collins, you contact Roger McGuire, a coworker of Collins’s. 
McGuire will talk to you only in confidence. You know Bailey’s polici es are to prosecute all 
criminal offenses. McGuire seems to be the key to making a case against Collins. You believe 
you can independently verify the allegations McGuire furnishes, but you will not be certain until 
you talk to him. It might be necessary to call  McGuire to testify against Collins in order to 
make the case. 
 
WRONG 
 “Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell  anyone about your talking to me.” 
 
  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.319 
RIGHT 
“Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell Ms. Collins about your talking to me.” 
 
The second is a conditional promise; the examiner will not directly tell Collins, but that 
doesn’t mean someone else won’t. At some point, informants and sources often become 
witnesses. Under no circumstances should an examiner promise a source or informant that 
his identity will not become known. 
 
 
Use of Operatives 
Operatives are subject to greater control than informants. In a typical scenario, a source or 
informant advises that information exists or that a crime is currently being committed. The 
informant’s motives might or might not be altruistic. For example, a warehouse worker 
approaches the fraud examiner and says that Collins is stealing inventory. The informant 
wants money for her assistance in apprehending Collins. The examiner does not know 
whether the informant is telling the truth or whether she is trying to divert attention from 
herself.  
 
The informant suggested that she secretly record a conversation with Collins, getting Collins 
to admit to the theft. If an informant conducts the investigation under the examiner’s 
direction, he then becomes an operative. To demonstrate a worst-case scenario, consider the 
following example. Without the examiner’s k nowledge or consent, the informant plants a 
tape recorder in the break room at the warehouse, and records conversations to which he is 
not a party. This is a violation of the law regarding interception of communication. Although 
the recording was made without the examiner’s knowledge or consent, the case is 
nonetheless compromised. The informant might insist that he recorded the conversations at 
the examiner’s request, thereby placing the examiner in the unenviable position of having to 
defend himself. 
 
Most operatives lack the training to conduct an investigation, and they cannot, in many 
instances, be trusted. It is vital that operatives be properly monitored and supervised. Obtain 
background information on the operative to ensure his degree of culpability in the offense, if 
any. Make certain that the operative clearly understands the objectives of the covert 
operation, and ensure that he is regularly debriefed before and after critical meetings with the 
target. Be careful that the operative does not take any action without proper authorization.  
  
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.320   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources for Satellite Imagery and Related Materials 
SPOT Image Corporation 
Sells imagery from the French SPOT satellite 
www.spot.com 
(703) 715-3100 
14595 Avion Parkway, Suite 500 
Chantilly, VA 20151 
 
U.S. Geographic Survey 
Sells aerial photographs, some radar images, and photographs from U.S. space missions 
www.usgs.gov 
(800) 233-8081 or (650) 329-5555 
U.S. Geological Survey Customer Service 
345 Middlefield Road 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
 
The Orthoshop 
Makes maps and corrects satellite imagery 
www.orthoshop.com 
(800) 563-1740 or (403) 250-7830 
1723-27th Avenue, N.E. 
Calgary, Alberta T2E 7E1 
 
Satellite and Civil Liberties 
In the 1980s, the Supreme Court made several rulings that established the legal basis for 
satellite surveillance. Some of these key rulings are listed below. 
 
California v. Ciraolo, 106 S.Ct. 1809, 1810 (1986). The court ruled that aerial photographs did 
not interfere with a person’s expectation of privacy. 
 
United States v. Dunn, 55 U.S.L.W. 4251, 4253 (1987). The court held that open areas are not 
protected by Fourth Amendment rights. 
 
Dow Chemical Company v. United States, 106 S.Ct. 1819 (1986). The court enunciated standards 
regarding the legality of aerial photography. It expressed concern about satellite surveillance, 
but did not establish any legal distinction between aerial photography and satellite 
surveillance.
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.401 



:


covert examin
a covert oper is design to obtain evid by us of agent whose true role is
undisclos to the target there ar two major form of covert oper undercov oper
and surveil oper
sever distinct defin these type of covert oper undercov oper seek to
develop evid directli from peopl involv in the offens through the us of disguis
and deceit rather than wait for the inform to come by other rout there is a
consciou decis to seek it out in contrast surveil oper us the skill of
observ to determin activ of individu the surveil oper is design to
gather inform
covert oper requir the highest degre of skill and plan us in a time manner
with great care a covert oper can produc result that cannot be achiev in ani other
wai us incorrectli or handl badli covert oper can lead to embarrass
seriou financi liabil injuri and even death
disguis and deceit in undercov oper ar well recogn by the court as a
legitim function of public and privat law enforc provid the undercov
oper is base on suffici probabl caus covert oper cannot be conduct as
fish expedit justif for conduct the oper must be legal sound and
defens and must not violat a person reason expect of privaci
prior to an undercov oper it is essenti that the basi for the oper be commit
to write prefer in a memo see re port write the memorandum should clearli
state
the inform upon which the covert oper will be base
the inform that is expect to be gain from the oper
the ident of suspect if known
oper under your care custodi or control
a fraud examin is undercov when he offici abandon hi ident as an examin and
adopt on design to obtain inform from peopl who do not realiz hi true ident
the assum ident might involv onli the adopt of anoth name or it might requir
covert examin investig
3302 2011 fraud examin manual
an elabor cover the aim should be to avoid be compromis to minim danger to
the fraud examin and to ensur ultim success of the oper
inform sought might includ the locat of outlet for stolen good the subject
method of oper detail person data on all subject and ani other relev
inform inform should be develop with care to avoid alert the target or their
associ onli those peopl who need to know should be inform of the undercov
investig
establish an ident
a cover stori must be fabric to conceal the true ident of the fraud examin the
stori should help the examin gain the subject confid but it should rare if ever be
wholli fictiti the examin should be from a citi with which he is familiar but not from
the home citi of the subject arrang should be made to have kei peopl in the
fictiti histori corrobor the undercov examin claim
particular attent should be paid to item carri by the undercov examin such as
pocketbook watch ring token suitcas ticket stub miscellan paper match
letter and sum of monei document and ident card should show the appropri
amount of wear and tear the fraud examin should be abl to explain how each item came
into hi possess
there should be a natur contact between the undercov examin and the subject the
background stori should contain element that will bring the suspect and the examin
togeth without ani contriv effort a mutual interest in hobbi sport and other leisur
activ can provid an opportun for get acquaint the examin should not pose
as an author on a subject unless total qualifi mani time an examin admit lack
of knowledgebut an interest ina given subj ect will help make the subject feel import
and not threaten
accord to timothi j walsh a secur expert the follow situat ar those in which
covert oper have tradition work well
there is reliabl inform about crimin activ or asset loss but insuffici detail
for prevent or apprehens
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3303
loss ar known to be occur in an area but there is no inform as to how thei
ar occur or who is respons
it is desir to gather inform concern person relationship or to identifi the
contact made with or by certain peopl
it is desir to compar actual practic with suppos or requir practic
it is import to obtain inform in an indirect manner from peopl believ to
possess it
covert oper should be us when there is no other practic wai to obtain
necessari inform
object
accord to paul oconnel in an articl for secur manag on of the first step in
initi an undercov oper is to identifi the object of the investig the
object must specif identifi what the oper is design to discov such as the
ident of the fraudul worker respons for a specif crime
the specif object of a covert oper depend on the type of investig be
conduct the object in the surveil of a warehous would not be the same as those
in surveil design to determin if collin is receiv a kickback from nagel howev
all covert oper have similar gener object
to obtain evid of a past current or futur crime thi evid usual bear on the
culpabl of individu if an oper in a covert investig is pose as a thief for
exampl actual thiev might confess their involv to him unawar that their
convers were be record
to identifi those engag in possibl illeg activ if for exampl cash is miss a covert
investig or surveil might disclos who is commit the offens thereaft
the covert oper might be discontinu and the evid gather by more
tradit mean
to recov illeg gain if an account payabl clerk ha been steal to purchas an
automobil locat the car might permit civil litig to recov it
to identifi coconspir if an employe is in collus with anoth employe a covert
oper might lead to the ident of the second individu
1 oconnel e paul is a ruse the best rout secur manag decemb 1995 pp 2630
covert examin investig
3304 2011 fraud examin manual
to identifi the modu operandi again in the case of miss good the ident of the
perpetr might be known or suspect but the intern control defici
permit the theft might be unknown a covert oper might discov the
miss link
problem in covert oper
in addit to the legal problem a fraud examin might encount a covert oper is the
most costli and riski work an examin can undertak such oper consum great
amount of human resourc thei should be us onli with extrem care and as a last
resort if the case can be made ani other wai the fraud examin should stai awai from
covert oper
there ar law govern surreptiti audio andor video record in some jurisdict
it is unlaw to make an audio record or to listen in on a convers unless you ar a
parti to that convers in other jurisdict it is law to record ani convers as
long as on parti to the convers consent
record convers with eavesdrop devic supersensit microphon that listen
from behind close door for exampl usual is illeg peopl behind close door have a
reason expect of privaci videotap or photograph someon in a public place
is legal if the person doe not have a rea onabl expect of privaci in such a place
for instanc a restroom or locker room might be a public place but peopl have a
reason expect of privaci that thei will not be photograph if oper or
wit ar us to record telephon or other convers written consent should
be obtain sampl form us for thi purpos can be found in the report
standard section
although it is gener not a crime to videotap a person in public if the tape is not to be
us for commerci purpos ie you will not be sell the tape if ani part of the
person convers or word ar pick up on tape then the tape is subject to all of the
law and rule regard the record of convers it as if you were record the
person on the telephon you mai be prohibit fr om record the convers if you ar
not a parti to it or you do not have the person consent
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3305
in summari the law govern audio and video record can be confus and complex
pleas refer to the chapter on individu right in the law section of the fraud examin
manual for more inform and contact a lawyer if you have ani doubt
entrap
entrap occur when law enforc offic or govern agent induc a person to
commit a crime that he is not previous dispos to commit entrap pose the biggest
legal problem in covert oper particularli in undercov oper it is imper
that the oper be properli predic again covert oper must not be us for
fish expedit
exampl
a store owner wa concern becaus hi inventori cost were unusu high in relat to sale
he hire a privat investig to pose as a cont ract driver and deliv and pick up merchandis
to and from the store the investig proceed to offer kickback to all employe in the
ship depart if thei would allow him to leav without si gning for the merchandis on
employe took the bait and wa subsequ arrest for theft the case wa thrown out
becaus of entrap the court rule that there wa no reason to believ simpli becaus of a
high sale cost that merchandis wa be stolen furthermor the investig had no suspect
in mind he wa simpli fish
surveil
surveil is the plan observ of peopl place or object it is normal
concern with peopl place and object observ ar usual incident to the primari
interest of gather inform about certain peopl
there ar two gener type of surveil mobil and fix mobil surveil is
sometim refer to as tail or shadow and fix surveil as a stakeout or
plant mobil surveil can be done on foot or by vehicl and is carri out when
peopl be observ move from locat to locat a fix surveil is us when a
person or activ remain in place although the observ might move from on vantag
point to anoth in the immedi area
covert examin investig
3306 2011 fraud examin manual
surveil whether by foot or vehicl is predominantli an exercis in common sens
skill tact and ingenu on the part of the observ carefulli plan and properli execut
surveil can be of tremend valu in an investig convers lack of prepar
poor time and unsound surveil practic can destroi an otherwis good case
surveil can be us to locat resid busi or other place of interest to
the investig and place where crimin activ is conduct it can also produc
import evid concern the scope and natur of a person activ surveil
activ must be carefulli record detail note and log film and video often with
special lens and light sourc tape record and miniatur electron listen devic
must be us appropri
method of surveil
dure loos surveil target need not be kept under constant observ the surveil
should be discontinu if the person becom suspici in close surveil subject ar kept
under observ continu even if thei appear to becom suspici
circumst might requir a chang from a loos to a close surveil preplan
help but the examin must observ and interpret the act or circumst to decid what
tactic to emploi if the plan call for loos surveil until the complet of a specifi
act or until a meet with anoth person after which the subject is to be put under close
surveil or apprehend the observ must determin when the specif incid ha
taken place
prepar
the observ attir should fit in with the ar ea andor group dress should be conserv
unless conserv dress is not appropri for the area attir should not be loud or flashi
so that if the subject note the observ he will be less like to form ani last impress
minor chang in outer cloth or handcarri item might alter the overal impress and
help prevent recognit by the subject
two or more observ work togeth need complet agreement about the surveil
techniqu and schedul discreet signal will help each observ understand ani given
situat plan is essenti but the observ adapt and ingenu ar vital
observ should be chosen for both aptitud and resourc thei must have pois
patienc and endur prior to the surveil the observ should prepar and
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3307
document a cover stori that will stand up under scrutini thi cover stori should provid
the observ with a reason excus for be in the area and for do what ha to be
done there
electron equip
us of electron surveil equip should be consid for surveil on foot
transmit and receiv devic can easili be hidden on the person without arous
suspicion transmitt can be conceal in packag briefcas or on the person light
gather binocular andor metascop equip for night surveil should be us if
necessari see the law section of the fraud examin manual for a descript of legal
electron monitor techniqu
basic precaut
an observ should refrain from make abrupt unnatur move that could attract
attent disguis such as fals beard ar impract hard to maintain and easili
detect the observ should not look directli into the subject ey inexperienc
observ must overcom the tendenc to believ that thei have been made identifi
becaus the subject glanc at them sever time the geographi of the area where
surveil is to take place should be studi carefulli the observ should know the
locat of culsdesac or deadend street or allei to avoid be trap or discov a
suspici subject might suddenli revers cours enter a deadend street board and
suddenli depart from public transport or engag in a varieti of other evas action
the observ can counter these strategi by follow approv surveil techniqu
techniqu of foot surveil
oneperson surveil
oneperson surveil is best for a fix sur veillanc if a move oneperson surveil
must be us the observ should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep
fairli close crowd and street condit will dictat the appropri distanc when the
subject turn a corner in an uncrowd area the observ should continu cross the
intersect street by glanc up the street in the subject direct the subject posit
and action can be note
in a crowd area surveil distanc might be decreas unless the subject is stand
just around the corner surveil can be continu from the same side of the street do
not turn a corner immedi behind the subject when oper across the street from the
covert examin investig
3308 2011 fraud examin manual
subject circumst will dictat whether to oper forward to the rear or abreast of the
target the observ should be abreast of the target when he turn a corner to observ ani
contact with individu or entri into a build
twoperson surveil
in the ab surveil techniqu the observ directli behind the target is known as the
a observ a follow the target and b follow a either on the same side or from across
the street when both observ oper from the same side of the street and the subject
turn a corner a continu in the origin direct and cross the intersect street from
a vantag point a signal the correct move to b when b is oper across the street and
the subject turn a corner to the right b will cross the street behind the subject and take up
the a posit thi move should be prearrang no signal should be necessari all visual
signal should be discreet and consist with the environ should the subject turn to
the left and cross the street toward b b should drop back to avoid meet the subject b
should keep a in sight to observ signal indic hi next move
threeperson surveil
the abc techniqu of surveil is intend to keep two side of the subject cover
a follow the subject b follow a and concentr on keep him rather than the subject
in sight the normal posit for b is behind a c normal oper across the street from
the subject and slightli to hi rear enabl c to observ the subject without turn hi
head variat such as have both b and c ac ross the street or all three of the observ
behind the subject on the same side of the street might be necessari becaus of crowd
condit or traffic in thi techniqu if the subject turn a corner a continu in the
origin direct cross the intersect street and then signal instruct to the other
observ from that vantag point either b or c can be given the a posit and a might
take up the origin c posit and continu hi observ of the subject from across
the street
in anoth variat of thi techniqu both a and b might continu in the origin direct
and cross the street a signal c to take up the a posit b then recross the street and
assum hi former b posit a assum the c posit in the third situat when c
notic that the subject is about to turn a corner c signal both a and b what posit
to assum
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3309
other techniqu
there ar other wai to lessen the chanc of an observ be made first by either pre
arrang or signal the two or more observ can chang place with each other thi is
commonli refer to as the leapfrog method
progress surveil is us when extrem caution is necessari with thi techniqu the
subject is follow a certain distanc and the surveil is discontinu and the time note
the next dai anoth observ pick up the subject at the time and place where the
surveil wa previous discontinu and again follow the subject for a short distanc
thi continu dai after dai until the surveil is complet
techniqu of vehicl surveil
gener
vehicl surveil demand addit prepar a depend vehicl similar to type
commonli found in the area where the surveil is to take place must be us thi can
be a panel truck automobil or a larg truck or trailer the licens should be of the state and
counti where the surveil will take place if more than on vehicl is to be us twowai
radio or cellular telephon convers is usual necessari consider should be given
to gasolin water firstaid equip and roadmap requir
whenev possibl combin foot and vehicular surveil is an advantag the
observ will like remain more alert when a subject park hi vehicl and remain in it an
observ on foot can better monitor the subject action and those of passersbi
as in foot surveil vehicular surveil requir inconspicu action observ
should gener stai in the same lane as the target to avoid have to make turn from the
wrong lane if the situat allow observ should chang direct perhap go around
a block in order to break continu befor the suspect becom suspici it is difficult at
night for the observ to be sure thei ar follow the right vehicl the target car can be
kept in sight better if it is distinct if the opportun aris reflect tape can be attach
to the rear of the subject car the dome light of the observ car should be disconnect
so that the light will not show when a door is open headlight and licensepl light can
be wire to allow them to be turn on or off
covert examin investig
3310 2011 fraud examin manual
onevehicl surveil
when on vehicl is us it must remain close enough to allow the observ to monitor the
subject action but far enough behind to avoid detect when a subject car stop on
observ should follow hi action on foot the subject normal will not expect to be tail
by a person on foot while he is us hi car when the subject turn a corner the observ
can make on of two possibl move thei can continu in the origin direct cross the
intersect street and make a uturn the subject will take littl interest in a car turn into
the street behind him come from the opposit direct an altern would be to
continu in the origin direct cross the intersect street and continu around
the block
twovehicl surveil
thi techniqu us two vehicl to follow the subject at differ distanc on the same
street as in the ab method of foot surveil thi techniqu can be vari by have
on vehicl go in the same direct as the subject on a parallel street while receiv
radiotransmit direct from the observ directli behind the subject thi techniqu is
more flexibl becaus the two vehicl can chang place from time to time
fix surveil
a fix surveil or stakeout is us when the subject remain stationari the observ
can move around for closer observ when on observ is detail to watch a place
with more than on exit he might have to move about consider when prepar for a
stakeout the base of oper should be well plan it might be a store apart
hous automobil or truck a thorough but cautiousarea reconnaiss should be
conduct necessari equip should be readili avail such as binocular electron
investig aid camera and sound record devic
satellit surveil
although fraud examin will rare need it satellit data ar now avail for a rel
small amount an examin can bui detail imag from nearli anywher in the world
plant secur lend itself to satellit imageri in addit to provid much of the same
inform as convent satellit photograph multispectr imageri can detect muddi
ground path taken by peopl and vehicl and other inform that might help identifi
potenti secur problem
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3311
satellit imageri can be us in surveil if it is combin with more tradit type of
photograph intellig thi is especi true for larg estat or industri site where
aerial photographi is prohibit it also can be benefici in a covert oper
satellit imageri can help to determin wai to penetr a site develop a map of the
ground and identifi import area in addit satellit imageri can be us to
investig area that ar too remot expens or danger to send oper
bui satellit imageri is simpl if the latitud and longitud of the target is known the
product rang from photograph print of the imag to magnet tape of geograph
correct data print not much differ from the enlarg from a film processor ar
usual the cheapest product while thei dont allow sophist enhanc thei onli
requir a magnifi glass to examin
the next most expens product is a transpar or a neg it allow the interpret to
make print and is conveni for exhibit with an overhead projector stereogram ar
pair of imag that show the same object from slightli differ posit and provid a
threedimension view when look at with stereoscop glass thei ar avail as either
print or transpar magnet tape is the digit version of the imag a particularli
sophist analysi of the target is possibl with magnet tape
night surveil equip
basic there ar two type of night view devic activ and passiv the activ type put
out it own light sourc an infrar beam which is visibl to the user through the infrar
scope that is part of the unit the advantag of the activ type of night view devic is that
the user can see in total dark disadvantag includ limit rang and the fact that the
infrar beam is visibl to anyon look through an infrar scope or through a passiv
night view devic
the passiv type of night view devic electron amplifi whatev exist light is in
the environ such as moonlight or sky glow thi is why such unit sometim ar
refer to as starlight scope night view devic have been in us sinc 1969 their
primari purpos is to allow the observ of event occur more than on block awai at
night night view devic with adapt can be attach to the front of camera to
obtain evid that will stand up in court televis videotap movi and still photo
can all be obtain us night view devic
covert examin investig
3312 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc and inform
sourc and inform both serv the same purposeto provid inform to help
develop a case howev there ar notabl differ between confidenti sourc and
confidenti inform the term should not be us interchang
a confidenti sourc furnish inform as a result of occup or profess and ha no
culpabl in the alleg offens for exampl confidenti sourc might includ barber
attornei account and law enforc personnel a confidenti inform ha a direct or
indirect involv in the matter under investig and might be culpabl the
distinct between the two is their involv in the offens inform can pose
treacher legal issu for the examin
tom melsheim a former feder prosecutor suggest from hi experi that no piec of
evid is quit as convinc to a juri as a secretli photograph or record convers
that an inform can obtain firsthand thi inform is gener accept as a slam
dunk for a crimin prosecutor becaus there is littl that a whitecollar crimin can disput
when caught in the act of a fraud for thi reason the us of inform is like to increas
in futur fraud investig
type of inform
in the book crimin investig author paul b weston and kenneth m well identifi
sever differ type of inform the basic lead the particip the covert and the
accomplicewit
basic lead inform
thi type of inform suppli inform to the polic about illicit activ that thei have
encount the reason that the inform decid to suppli inform ar vari some
inform simpli want to do their part to stop an unscrupul activ while other ar
interest in harm the crimin against whom thei ar inform for instanc mani
inform in the drug prostitut or illeg gambl area ar involv in those area as
well and intend to elimin some of their competit whatev the reason these
inform onli role in a covert investig is to suppli law enforc with
inform
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3313
particip inform
the particip inform is directli involv in gather preliminari evid in the
investig the inform in thi instanc not onli suppli an investig with
inform but the inform is also involv in set up a sting oper initi
contact with the crimin for arrest purpos a particip inform is just what the name
suggestsa particip in the investig of fraudul or crimin activ
covert inform
a covert inform serv the same basic function that ani other type of inform doe by
suppli inform to author on crimin behavior the differ in thi categori is
that a covert inform is on who ha been embed in a situat or scenario for a
number of year and is call upon onli sporad for tipoff and lead these type of
inform ar often refer to as mole becaus of the natur of their insul situat as
insid sourc weston and well identifi two instanc in which covert inform ar
commonli us in organ crime and hateextremist group investig covert
inform ar often cull to get inform about upcom crimin activ by
the group
accomplicewit inform
the accomplicewit inform is call upon by investig quit often to provid
inform on crimin activ the distinct in thi categori is that if the
accomplicewit inform were not feed inform to investig he would be
liabl to be prosecut for the same offens the accomplic inform is often persuad
to spill the bean on a coconspir in exchang for lenienc in the prosecut phase of
the investig
object of sourc and inform inform
there ar three essenti procedur when us sourc and inform first to keep the
person ident as confidenti as possibl second to independ verifi the inform
provid by the sourc or inform third to develop wit and documentari evid
from independ verifi inform
if the confidenti sourc or inform ha provid document name of potenti
wit or other evid all reason step must be taken to protect the ident of that
sourc care should be taken to ensur that question of other wit is done in a
manner that doe not reveal it origin thi can usual be accomplish through the
covert examin investig
3314 2011 fraud examin manual
phrase of question for exampl mari rodriguez de la garza furnish confidenti
inform about linda reed collin when the examin confront collin he doe not
want her to know that he ha talk to ms de la garza
exampl
wrong
ms collin someon told me you were take kickback
right
ms collin i have inform indic you ar take monei from a vendor
you have made the confront direct but you have not reveal the origin of your
inform if collin press to learn how you knew
ms collin
who did you get that inform from
examin
document i have from the compani record plu other inquiri conduct in thi matter
in thi exampl if need be the examin would displai the evid from wit and
document that would not reveal the sourc or inform ident the inform from
the sourc or inform is basic useless unless the examin can verifi it authent and
independ corrobor it suppos a sourc furnish the examin with copi of
account payabl document show that bailei book incorpor cost of materi ha
increas by 16 percent sinc linda reed collin took over the account at the orion
corpor thi kind of evid would corrobor the sourc stori if a sourc told the
examin that collin frequent had drink with jim nagel the account repres for
orion the examin would want to find out some wai to verifi thi report the third
object when us sourc is to develop the witnesss inform and other evid so
that it make a cohes case
recruit of sourc and inform
fraud examin should recal the need to develop sourc busi and financi institut
execut law enforc and other government personnel medic and educ
profession and intern and extern auditor ar good contact for fraud examin
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3315
the examin should make contact in the commun well in advanc of need
inform thi is simpli good public relat if the fraud examin receiv an alleg
and need confidenti inform perhap a sourc cultiv earlier can assist sourc
need to feel confid that thei can share inform without be compromis in
theori the sourc will never have to testifi he ha no firsthand knowledg hi inform
come from a wit or document
the examin might also meet sourc when track lead dure a specif investig
he might interview a stockbrok from whom the target purchas stock who doe not want
hi ident reveal the examin should not encourag a person to provid confidenti
inform but rather try to get report on the record but if the sourc inform must
be kept confidenti abid by that promis
activ recruit of inform is gener not desir it might appear untoward to a
juri it is better to encourag an inform to come forward it is desir to develop an
inform relationship but thi situat must be handl carefulli the examin must
clearli document an adequ predic for inform involv the most seriou
question is the culpabl of the inform there have been case where the inform is
guiltier than the target the court might rule that the inform inform cannot be
introduc
motiv of sourc and inform
sourc
in some instanc but not mani the sourc might want monei or other consider for
furnish inform the examin should not offer ani compens it is better to
have the sourc request it thi is to avoid ani alleg of misconduct on the part of the
examin for pai for inform sourc have their reason for inform it might be
the sens of import that come from be involv or a chanc to plai detect in
other case the sourc might have a grudg against the target other reason includ a
feel of moral respons to report inform perhap more than ani other reason a
sourc will furnish inform becaus he like and trust the examin and want to help
inform
inform especi incident on commonli want someth in return for their
inform thei take the attitud that their involv ha person risk and thei want
covert examin investig
3316 2011 fraud examin manual
to be paid for their troubl the inform is like to be predispos to sell inform
to the highest bidder
mani informantsperhap the majorityar unstabl as often as not an inform
motiv is to get the target not becaus of ani sens of moral but becaus the
inform and the target ar close involv in the case of drug deal for exampl an
inform might furnish inform becaus the target is the competit in other case
the inform is motiv by a sens of selfimport he is a big man peopl take
him serious
probabl the most common reason inform suppli inform is becaus thei ar
involv in the offens and by furnish inform on the target which is commonli
fals thei can diffus suspicion from their own activ in mani instanc the examin
initi doe not know the truth about the inform
the fraud examin must also be awar of the overzeal inform melsheim caution
that most of the recent catalogu case concern the abus of inform were the
result of involv inform who ar privat citizen selfmotiv to satisfi their law
enforc sponsor at virtual ani cost in an attempt to ingrati themselv to
investig the inform will often engag in unscrupul activ to provid the
inform thei think the investig ar look for the fraud examin must lai out the
ground rule for the inform befor begin thi type of investig or risk the
embarrass and punish that a lessthantruth inform can provid
legal consider
as note deal with sourc and inform is fraught with legal pitfal the examin
should be circumspect in all interact with sourc and inform the examin might
be abl to trust a sourc but rare an inform alwai document contact with sourc
and inform in case of problem
mani jurisdict guarante the accus the right to confront hi accus that is an
absolut right of the accus it is not possibl to crossexamin someon who lurk behind
a cloak of secreci the examin will usual not be abl to testifi to what a sourc or
inform said becaus of the hearsai rule the wit can testifi onli to what he know
not what someon els ha said
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3317
if a decis is made to pai an inform or sourc the payment should be made in cash and
a receipt should be secur if the sourc will not sign a receipt do not pai there have been
numer instanc where a receipt wa not obtain and the inform subsequ deni
receiv fund or challeng the amount the examin then ha to defend himself without
proof inde some investig have been accus of have embezzl the payment
payment should onli be on a cod basi the inform should be furnish and verifi
befor turn over ani monei if not the examin might becom the victim of a scam
entrap is sometim rais as a crimin defens thi is especi true when the
inform is do thing at the behest of law enforc the defens is that the target is
innoc but wa unlawfulli lure into a crime that he otherwis would not have
commit thi can best be overcom by ensur that the sourc or inform onli gather
inform and plai a limit role in the case
report contact
it is recommend that all contact with inform and sourc be report on a
memorandum of interview although the confidenti sourc or inform ident should
not be includ in the report symbol to denot the inform ident should be us it
is further recommend that sourc be preced with an s follow by a uniqu identifi
ie sourc 1 would be s1 sourc 2 would be s2 the symbol for inform
would then be i1 and i2
as a gener rule disclosur of the ident of sourc and inform should be on a strict
needtoknow basi for that reason the person ident should be maintain in a secur
file with limit access and crossindex by hi symbol number the reliabl of the
sourc if known and whether the person is in a posit to furnish relev inform
should both be note in write
exampl
a sourc of unknown reliabl but in a posit to furnish relev
inform hereinaft refer to as s1 advis as follow
or
an inform of known reliabl and in a posit to furnish relev inform
hereinaft refer to as i2 advis as follow
covert examin investig
3318 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud examin is not in a posit to promis lenienc to peopl involv in the
commiss of a crime or tort to do so is seriou misconduct and a violat of the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic promis of lenienc can onli
come from the prosecutor or the court the examin might truthfulli tell the inform
that hi cooper will be made known to the author and that peopl who cooper
ar gener treat better
for reason previous discuss it is best not to us sourc and inform in ongo
crime as doubl agent such action is inher riski and place the examin in the
posit of have to defend the action of the sourc or inform action that in most
case the examin cannot control thi leav the case open to attack dure legal
proceed if it appear critic that the sourc be us as an agent get the approv of the
prosecutor andor attornei befor proceed
promis of confidenti
fraud examin ar not in a posit to offer unqualifi confidenti therefor ani
promis made to an inform or sourc should be qualifi in the case of an examin
who is emploi by a government agenc there might be an absolut duti not to hold
sourc and inform in confid in mani law enforc agenc an investig
might not have inform or sourc who ar unknown to the agenc government
agenc also regularli share inform on crimin investig with prosecutor
includ the ident of the sourc of inform the same regul and consider
could govern busi entiti
exampl
dure the examin of collin you contact roger mcguir a cowork of collinss
mcguir will talk to you onli in confid you know bailei polici es ar to prosecut all
crimin offens mcguir seem to be the kei to make a case against collin you believ
you can independ verifi the alleg mcguir furnish but you will not be certain until
you talk to him it might be necessari to call mcguir to testifi against collin in order to
make the case
wrong
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell anyon about your talk to me
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3319
right
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell ms collin about your talk to me
the second is a condit promis the examin will not directli tell collin but that
doesnt mean someon els wont at some point inform and sourc often becom
wit under no circumst should an examin promis a sourc or inform that
hi ident will not becom known
us of oper
oper ar subject to greater control than inform in a typic scenario a sourc or
inform advis that inform exist or that a crime is current be commit the
inform motiv might or might not be altruist for exampl a warehous worker
approach the fraud examin and sai that collin is steal inventori the inform
want monei for her assist in apprehend collin the examin doe not know
whether the inform is tell the truth or whether she is try to divert attent from
herself
the inform suggest that she secretli record a convers with collin get collin
to admit to the theft if an inform conduct the investig under the examin
direct he then becom an oper to demonstr a worstcas scenario consid the
follow exampl without the examin k nowledg or consent the inform plant a
tape record in the break room at the warehous and record convers to which he is
not a parti thi is a violat of the law regard intercept of commun although
the record wa made without the examin knowledg or consent the case is
nonetheless compromis the inform might insist that he record the convers at
the examin request therebi place the examin in the unenvi posit of have to
defend himself
most oper lack the train to conduct an investig and thei cannot in mani
instanc be trust it is vital that oper be properli monitor and supervis obtain
background inform on the oper to ensur hi degre of culpabl in the offens if
ani make certain that the oper clearli understand the object of the covert
oper and ensur that he is regularli debrief befor and after critic meet with the
target be care that the oper doe not take ani action without proper author
covert examin investig
3320 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc for satellit imageri and relat materi
spot imag corpor
sell imageri from the french spot satellit
wwwspotcom
703 7153100
14595 avion parkwai suit 500
chantilli va 20151
us geograph survei
sell aerial photograph some radar imag and photograph from us space mission
wwwusgsgov
800 2338081 or 650 3295555
us geolog survei custom servic
345 middlefield road
menlo park ca 94025
the orthoshop
make map and correct satellit imageri
wwworthoshopcom
800 5631740 or 403 2507830
172327th avenu ne
calgari alberta t2e 7e1
satellit and civil liberti
in the 1980 the suprem court made sever rule that establish the legal basi for
satellit surveil some of these kei rule ar list below
california v ciraolo 106 sct 1809 1810 1986 the court rule that aerial photograph did
not interfer with a person expect of privaci
unit state v dunn 55 uslw 4251 4253 1987 the court held that open area ar not
protect by fourth amend right
dow chemic compani v unit state 106 sct 1819 1986 the court enunci standard
regard the legal of aerial photographi it express concern about satellit surveil
but did not establish ani legal distinct between aerial photographi and satellit
surveil
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3401
