2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Problems in Covert Operations


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Problems in Covert Operations 
In addition to the legal problems a fraud examiner might encounter, a covert operation is the 
most costly and risky work an examiner can undertake. Such operations consume great 
amounts of human resources. They should be used only with extreme care, and as a last 
resort. If the case can be made any other way, the fraud examiner should stay away from 
covert operations.  
 
There are laws governing surreptitious audio and/or video recordings. In some jurisdictions, 
it is unlawful to make an audio recording or to listen in on a conversation unless you are a 
party to that conversation. In other jurisdictions, it is lawful to record any conversation as 
long as one party to the conversation consents.  
 
Recording conversations with eavesdropping devices (supersensitive microphones that listen 
from behind closed doors, for example) usually is illegal. People behind closed doors have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Videotaping or photographing someone in a public place 
is legal, if the person does not have a “reas onable expectation” of privacy in such a place. 
For instance, a restroom or locker room might be a “public place,” but people have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy that they will not be photographed. If operatives or 
witnesses are used to record telephone or other conversations, written consent should  
be obtained. Sample forms used for this purpose can be found in the “Reporting  
Standards” section. 
 
Although it is generally not a crime to videotape a person in public if the tape is not to be 
used for commercial purposes (i.e., you will not be selling the tape), if any part of the 
person’s conversation or words are picked up on tape, then the tape is subject to all of the 
laws and rules regarding the recording of conversations. It’s as if you were recording the 
person on the telephone; you may be prohibited fr om recording the conversation if you are 
not a party to it or you do not have the person’s consent. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.305 
In summary, the laws governing audio and video recordings can be confusing and complex. 
Please refer to the chapter on “Individual Rights” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners 
Manual  for more information, and contact a lawyer if you have any doubts. 
 
 



:


problem in covert oper
in addit to the legal problem a fraud examin might encount a covert oper is the
most costli and riski work an examin can undertak such oper consum great
amount of human resourc thei should be us onli with extrem care and as a last
resort if the case can be made ani other wai the fraud examin should stai awai from
covert oper
there ar law govern surreptiti audio andor video record in some jurisdict
it is unlaw to make an audio record or to listen in on a convers unless you ar a
parti to that convers in other jurisdict it is law to record ani convers as
long as on parti to the convers consent
record convers with eavesdrop devic supersensit microphon that listen
from behind close door for exampl usual is illeg peopl behind close door have a
reason expect of privaci videotap or photograph someon in a public place
is legal if the person doe not have a rea onabl expect of privaci in such a place
for instanc a restroom or locker room might be a public place but peopl have a
reason expect of privaci that thei will not be photograph if oper or
wit ar us to record telephon or other convers written consent should
be obtain sampl form us for thi purpos can be found in the report
standard section
although it is gener not a crime to videotap a person in public if the tape is not to be
us for commerci purpos ie you will not be sell the tape if ani part of the
person convers or word ar pick up on tape then the tape is subject to all of the
law and rule regard the record of convers it as if you were record the
person on the telephon you mai be prohibit fr om record the convers if you ar
not a parti to it or you do not have the person consent
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3305
in summari the law govern audio and video record can be confus and complex
pleas refer to the chapter on individu right in the law section of the fraud examin
manual for more inform and contact a lawyer if you have ani doubt
