2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Surveillance 
Surveillance is the planned observation of people, places, or objects. It is normally 
concerned with people. Places and objects observed are usually incidental to the primary 
interest of gathering information about certain people. 
 
There are two general types of surveillance: mobile and fixed. Mobile surveillance is 
sometimes referred to as “tailing” or “shadowing ,” and fixed surveillance as a “stakeout” or 
“plant.” Mobile surveillance can be done on foot or by vehicle and is carried out when 
people being observed move from location to location. A fixed surveillance is used when a 
person or activity remains in place, although the observers might move from one vantage 
point to another in the immediate area. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Surveillance, whether by foot or vehicle, is predominantly an exercise in common sense, 
skill, tact, and ingenuity on the part of the observer. Carefully planned and properly executed 
surveillance can be of tremendous value in an investigation; conversely, lack of preparation, 
poor timing, and unsound surveillance practices can destroy an otherwise good case. 
 
Surveillance can be used to locate residences, businesses, or other places of interest to  
the investigation, and places where criminal activity is conducted. It can also produce 
important evidence concerning the scope and nature of a person’s activities. Surveillance 
activities must be carefully recorded. Detailed notes and logs, film and video (often with 
special lenses and light sources), tape recordings, and miniature electronic listening devices 
must be used appropriately. 
 
Methods of Surveillance 
During loose surveillance, targets need not be kept under constant observation. The surveillance 
should be discontinued if the person becomes suspicious. In close surveillance, subjects are kept 
under observation continuously even if they appear to become suspicious. 
 
Circumstances might require a change from a loose to a close surveillance. Pre-planning 
helps, but the examiner must observe and interpret the act or circumstances to decide what 
tactic to employ. If the plan calls for loose surveillance until the completion of a specified 
act, or until a meeting with another person, after which the subject is to be put under close 
surveillance or apprehended, the observer must determine when the specific incident has 
taken place. 
 
Preparation 
The observer’s attire should fit in with the ar ea and/or group. Dress should be conservative, 
unless conservative dress is not appropriate for the area. Attire should not be loud or flashy 
so that if the subject notes the observer, he will be less likely to form any lasting impression. 
Minor changes in outer clothing or hand-carried  items might alter the overall impression and 
help prevent recognition by the subject. 
 
Two or more observers working together need complete agreement about the surveillance 
techniques and schedule. Discreet signals will help each observer understand any given 
situation. Planning is essential, but the observers’ adaptability and ingenuity are vital. 
Observers should be chosen for both aptitude and resourcefulness. They must have poise, 
patience, and endurance. Prior to the surveillance, the observer should prepare and 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.307 
document a cover story that will stand up under scrutiny. This cover story should provide 
the observer with a reasonable excuse for being in the area and for doing what has to be 
done there. 
 
Electronic Equipment 
Use of electronic surveillance equipment should be considered. For surveillance on foot, 
transmitting and receiving devices can easily be hidden on the person without arousing 
suspicion. Transmitters can be concealed in packages, briefcases, or on the person. Light-
 gathering binoculars and/or metascope equipment for night surveillance should be used if 
necessary. See the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for a description of legal 
electronic monitoring techniques. 
 
Basic Precautions 
An observer should refrain from making abrupt, unnatural moves that could attract 
attention. Disguises such as false beards are impractical, hard to maintain, and easily 
detectable. The observer should not look directly into the subject’s eyes. Inexperienced 
observers must overcome the tendency to believe that they have been “made” (identified) 
because the subject glances at them several times. The geography of the area where 
surveillance is to take place should be studied carefully. The observer should know the 
location of culs-de-sac or dead-end streets or alleys to avoid being trapped or discovered. A 
suspicious subject might suddenly reverse course, enter a dead-end street, board and 
suddenly depart from public transportation, or engage in a variety of other evasive actions. 
The observer can counter these strategies by following approved surveillance techniques.  
 
Techniques of Foot Surveillance 
One-Person Surveillance 
One-person surveillance is best for a fixed sur veillance. If a moving one-person surveillance 
must be used, the observer should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep 
fairly close. Crowd and street conditions will dictate the appropriate distance. When the 
subject turns a corner in an uncrowded area the observer should continue crossing the 
intersecting street. By glancing up the street in the subject’s direction, the subject’s position 
and actions can be noted. 
 
In a crowded area, surveillance distances might be decreased. Unless the subject is standing 
just around the corner, surveillance can be continued from the same side of the street. Do 
not turn a corner immediately behind the subject. When operating across the street from the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject, circumstances will dictate whether to operate forward, to the rear, or abreast of the 
target. The observer should be abreast of the target when he turns a corner to observe any 
contact with individuals or entry into a building. 
 
Two-Person Surveillance 
In the “A-B” surveillance technique, the observer directly behind the target is known as the 
“A” observer. A follows the target, and B follows  A either on the same side or from across 
the street. When both observers operate from the same side of the street, and the subject 
turns a corner, A continues in the original direction and crosses the intersecting street. From 
a vantage point, A signals the correct moves to B. When B is operating across the street and 
the subject turns a corner to the right, B will cross the street behind the subject and take up 
the A position. This move should be prearranged. No signals should be necessary. All visual 
signals should be discreet and consistent with the environment. Should the subject turn to 
the left and cross the street toward B, B should drop back to avoid meeting the subject. B 
should keep A in sight to observe signals indicating his next move. 
 
Three-Person Surveillance 
The “A-B-C” technique of surveillance is intended to keep two sides of the subject covered. 
A follows the subject. B follows A and concentrates on keeping him rather than the subject 
in sight. The normal position for B is behind A. C normally operates across the street from 
the subject and slightly to his rear, enabling C to observe the subject without turning his 
head. Variations, such as having both B and C ac ross the street or all three of the observers 
behind the subject on the same side of the street, might be necessary because of crowded 
conditions or traffic. In this technique, if the subject turns a corner, A continues in the 
original direction, crosses the intersecting street, and then signals instructions to the other 
observers from that vantage point. Either B or C can be given the A position and A might 
take up the original C position and continue his observation of the subject from across  
the street. 
 
In another variation of this technique, both A and B might continue in the original direction 
and cross the street. A signals C to take up the A position. B then recrosses the street and 
assumes his former B position. A assumes the C position. In the third situation, when C 
notices that the subject is about to turn a corner, C signals both A and B what positions  
to assume. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.309 
Other Techniques 
There are other ways to lessen the chance of an observer being made. First, by either pre-
 arrangement or signal, the two or more observers can change places with each other. This is 
commonly referred to as the leap-frog method.  
 
Progressive surveillance is used when extreme caution is necessary. With this technique, the 
subject is followed a certain distance and the surveillance is discontinued and the time noted. 
The next day another observer picks up the subject at the time and place where the 
surveillance was previously discontinued, and again follows the subject for a short distance. 
This continues day after day until the surveillance is completed. 
 
Techniques of Vehicle Surveillance 
General 
Vehicle surveillance demands additional preparations. A dependable vehicle similar to types 
commonly found in the area where the surveillance is to take place must be used. This can 
be a panel truck, automobile, or a large truck or trailer. The license should be of the state and 
county where the surveillance will take place. If more than one vehicle is to be used, two-way 
radio or cellular telephone conversation is usually necessary. Consideration should be given 
to gasoline, water, first-aid equipment, and road-map requirements. 
 
Whenever possible, combining foot and vehicular surveillance is an advantage. The 
observers will likely remain more alert. When a subject parks his vehicle and remains in it, an 
observer on foot can better monitor the subject’s actions and those of passersby.  
 
As in foot surveillance, vehicular surveillance requires inconspicuous actions. Observers 
should generally stay in the same lane as the target to avoid having to make turns from the 
wrong lane. If the situation allows, observers should change direction, perhaps going around 
a block in order to break continuity before the suspect becomes suspicious. It is difficult at 
night for the observers to be sure they are following the right vehicle. The target’s car can be 
kept in sight better if it is distinctive. If the opportunity arises, reflective tape can be attached 
to the rear of the subject’s car. The dome light  of the observer’s car should be disconnected 
so that the light will not show when a door is opened. Headlights and license-plate lights can 
be wired to allow them to be turned on or off. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One-Vehicle Surveillance 
When one vehicle is used, it must remain close enough to allow the observers to monitor the 
subject’s actions, but far enough behind to avoid detection. When a subject’s car stops, one 
observer should follow his actions on foot. The subject normally will not expect to be tailed 
by a person on foot while he is using his car. When the subject turns a corner, the observers 
can make one of two possible moves. They can continue in the original direction, cross the 
intersecting street, and make a U-turn; the subject will take little interest in a car turning into 
the street behind him coming from the opposite direction. An alternative would be to 
continue in the original direction, cross the intersecting street, and continue around  
the block.  
 
Two-Vehicle Surveillance 
This technique uses two vehicles to follow the subject at different distances on the same 
street, as in the “A-B” method of foot surveillance. This technique can be varied by having 
one vehicle going in the same direction as the subject on a parallel street while receiving 
radio-transmitted directions from the observers directly behind the subject. This technique is 
more flexible because the two vehicles can change places from time to time. 
 
Fixed Surveillance 
A fixed surveillance, or stakeout, is used when the subject remains stationary. The observer 
can move around for closer observation. When one observer is detailed to watch a place 
with more than one exit, he might have to move about considerably. When preparing for a 
stakeout, the base of operations should be well planned. It might be a store, apartment, 
house, automobile, or truck. A thorough — but cautious—area reconnaissance should be 
conducted. Necessary equipment should be readily available, such as binoculars, electronic 
investigative aids, cameras, and sound recording devices.  
 
Satellite Surveillance 
Although fraud examiners will rarely need it, satellite data are now available. For a relatively 
small amount, an examiner can buy detailed images from nearly anywhere in the world. 
 
Plant security lends itself to satellite imagery. In addition to providing much of the same 
information as conventional satellite photographs, multispectral imagery can detect muddy 
ground, paths taken by people and vehicles, and other information that might help identify 
potential security problems. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.311 
Satellite imagery can be useful in surveillance if it is combined with more traditional types of 
photographic intelligence. This is especially true for large estates or industrial sites where 
aerial photography is prohibited. It also can be beneficial in a covert operation. 
 
Satellite imagery can help to determine ways to penetrate a site, develop a map of the 
grounds, and identify important areas. In addition, satellite imagery can be used to 
investigate areas that are too remote, expensive, or dangerous to send operatives. 
 
Buying satellite imagery is simple if the latitude and longitude of the target is known. The 
products range from photographic prints of the image to magnetic tapes of geographically 
corrected data. Prints, not much different from the enlargements from a film processor, are 
usually the cheapest product. While they don’t allow sophisticated enhancement, they only 
require a magnifying glass to examine.  
 
The next most expensive product is a transparency or a negative. It allows the interpreter to 
make prints and is convenient for exhibiting with an overhead projector. Stereograms are 
pairs of images that show the same object from slightly different positions and provide a 
three-dimensional view when looked at with stereoscopic glasses. They are available as either 
prints or transparencies. Magnetic tape is the digitized version of the images. A particularly 
sophisticated analysis of the target is possible with magnetic tape. 
 
Night Surveillance Equipment 
Basically, there are two types of night viewing devices: active  and passive. The active type puts 
out its own light source, an infrared beam, which is visible to the user through the infrared 
scope that is part of the unit. The advantage of the active type of night viewing device is that 
the user can see in total darkness. Disadvantages include limited range and the fact that the 
infrared beam is visible to anyone looking through an infrared scope or through a passive 
night viewing device. 
 
The passive type of night viewing device electronically amplifies whatever existing light is in 
the environment, such as moonlight or sky glow. This is why such units sometimes are 
referred to as “starlight scopes.” Night viewing  devices have been in use since 1969. Their 
primary purpose is to allow the observation of events occurring more than one block away at 
night. Night viewing devices, with adapters, can be attached to the front of cameras to 
obtain evidence that will stand up in court. Television videotapes, movies, and still photos 
can all be obtained using night viewing devices. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


surveil
surveil is the plan observ of peopl place or object it is normal
concern with peopl place and object observ ar usual incident to the primari
interest of gather inform about certain peopl
there ar two gener type of surveil mobil and fix mobil surveil is
sometim refer to as tail or shadow and fix surveil as a stakeout or
plant mobil surveil can be done on foot or by vehicl and is carri out when
peopl be observ move from locat to locat a fix surveil is us when a
person or activ remain in place although the observ might move from on vantag
point to anoth in the immedi area
covert examin investig
3306 2011 fraud examin manual
surveil whether by foot or vehicl is predominantli an exercis in common sens
skill tact and ingenu on the part of the observ carefulli plan and properli execut
surveil can be of tremend valu in an investig convers lack of prepar
poor time and unsound surveil practic can destroi an otherwis good case
surveil can be us to locat resid busi or other place of interest to
the investig and place where crimin activ is conduct it can also produc
import evid concern the scope and natur of a person activ surveil
activ must be carefulli record detail note and log film and video often with
special lens and light sourc tape record and miniatur electron listen devic
must be us appropri
method of surveil
dure loos surveil target need not be kept under constant observ the surveil
should be discontinu if the person becom suspici in close surveil subject ar kept
under observ continu even if thei appear to becom suspici
circumst might requir a chang from a loos to a close surveil preplan
help but the examin must observ and interpret the act or circumst to decid what
tactic to emploi if the plan call for loos surveil until the complet of a specifi
act or until a meet with anoth person after which the subject is to be put under close
surveil or apprehend the observ must determin when the specif incid ha
taken place
prepar
the observ attir should fit in with the ar ea andor group dress should be conserv
unless conserv dress is not appropri for the area attir should not be loud or flashi
so that if the subject note the observ he will be less like to form ani last impress
minor chang in outer cloth or handcarri item might alter the overal impress and
help prevent recognit by the subject
two or more observ work togeth need complet agreement about the surveil
techniqu and schedul discreet signal will help each observ understand ani given
situat plan is essenti but the observ adapt and ingenu ar vital
observ should be chosen for both aptitud and resourc thei must have pois
patienc and endur prior to the surveil the observ should prepar and
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3307
document a cover stori that will stand up under scrutini thi cover stori should provid
the observ with a reason excus for be in the area and for do what ha to be
done there
electron equip
us of electron surveil equip should be consid for surveil on foot
transmit and receiv devic can easili be hidden on the person without arous
suspicion transmitt can be conceal in packag briefcas or on the person light
gather binocular andor metascop equip for night surveil should be us if
necessari see the law section of the fraud examin manual for a descript of legal
electron monitor techniqu
basic precaut
an observ should refrain from make abrupt unnatur move that could attract
attent disguis such as fals beard ar impract hard to maintain and easili
detect the observ should not look directli into the subject ey inexperienc
observ must overcom the tendenc to believ that thei have been made identifi
becaus the subject glanc at them sever time the geographi of the area where
surveil is to take place should be studi carefulli the observ should know the
locat of culsdesac or deadend street or allei to avoid be trap or discov a
suspici subject might suddenli revers cours enter a deadend street board and
suddenli depart from public transport or engag in a varieti of other evas action
the observ can counter these strategi by follow approv surveil techniqu
techniqu of foot surveil
oneperson surveil
oneperson surveil is best for a fix sur veillanc if a move oneperson surveil
must be us the observ should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep
fairli close crowd and street condit will dictat the appropri distanc when the
subject turn a corner in an uncrowd area the observ should continu cross the
intersect street by glanc up the street in the subject direct the subject posit
and action can be note
in a crowd area surveil distanc might be decreas unless the subject is stand
just around the corner surveil can be continu from the same side of the street do
not turn a corner immedi behind the subject when oper across the street from the
covert examin investig
3308 2011 fraud examin manual
subject circumst will dictat whether to oper forward to the rear or abreast of the
target the observ should be abreast of the target when he turn a corner to observ ani
contact with individu or entri into a build
twoperson surveil
in the ab surveil techniqu the observ directli behind the target is known as the
a observ a follow the target and b follow a either on the same side or from across
the street when both observ oper from the same side of the street and the subject
turn a corner a continu in the origin direct and cross the intersect street from
a vantag point a signal the correct move to b when b is oper across the street and
the subject turn a corner to the right b will cross the street behind the subject and take up
the a posit thi move should be prearrang no signal should be necessari all visual
signal should be discreet and consist with the environ should the subject turn to
the left and cross the street toward b b should drop back to avoid meet the subject b
should keep a in sight to observ signal indic hi next move
threeperson surveil
the abc techniqu of surveil is intend to keep two side of the subject cover
a follow the subject b follow a and concentr on keep him rather than the subject
in sight the normal posit for b is behind a c normal oper across the street from
the subject and slightli to hi rear enabl c to observ the subject without turn hi
head variat such as have both b and c ac ross the street or all three of the observ
behind the subject on the same side of the street might be necessari becaus of crowd
condit or traffic in thi techniqu if the subject turn a corner a continu in the
origin direct cross the intersect street and then signal instruct to the other
observ from that vantag point either b or c can be given the a posit and a might
take up the origin c posit and continu hi observ of the subject from across
the street
in anoth variat of thi techniqu both a and b might continu in the origin direct
and cross the street a signal c to take up the a posit b then recross the street and
assum hi former b posit a assum the c posit in the third situat when c
notic that the subject is about to turn a corner c signal both a and b what posit
to assum
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3309
other techniqu
there ar other wai to lessen the chanc of an observ be made first by either pre
arrang or signal the two or more observ can chang place with each other thi is
commonli refer to as the leapfrog method
progress surveil is us when extrem caution is necessari with thi techniqu the
subject is follow a certain distanc and the surveil is discontinu and the time note
the next dai anoth observ pick up the subject at the time and place where the
surveil wa previous discontinu and again follow the subject for a short distanc
thi continu dai after dai until the surveil is complet
techniqu of vehicl surveil
gener
vehicl surveil demand addit prepar a depend vehicl similar to type
commonli found in the area where the surveil is to take place must be us thi can
be a panel truck automobil or a larg truck or trailer the licens should be of the state and
counti where the surveil will take place if more than on vehicl is to be us twowai
radio or cellular telephon convers is usual necessari consider should be given
to gasolin water firstaid equip and roadmap requir
whenev possibl combin foot and vehicular surveil is an advantag the
observ will like remain more alert when a subject park hi vehicl and remain in it an
observ on foot can better monitor the subject action and those of passersbi
as in foot surveil vehicular surveil requir inconspicu action observ
should gener stai in the same lane as the target to avoid have to make turn from the
wrong lane if the situat allow observ should chang direct perhap go around
a block in order to break continu befor the suspect becom suspici it is difficult at
night for the observ to be sure thei ar follow the right vehicl the target car can be
kept in sight better if it is distinct if the opportun aris reflect tape can be attach
to the rear of the subject car the dome light of the observ car should be disconnect
so that the light will not show when a door is open headlight and licensepl light can
be wire to allow them to be turn on or off
covert examin investig
3310 2011 fraud examin manual
onevehicl surveil
when on vehicl is us it must remain close enough to allow the observ to monitor the
subject action but far enough behind to avoid detect when a subject car stop on
observ should follow hi action on foot the subject normal will not expect to be tail
by a person on foot while he is us hi car when the subject turn a corner the observ
can make on of two possibl move thei can continu in the origin direct cross the
intersect street and make a uturn the subject will take littl interest in a car turn into
the street behind him come from the opposit direct an altern would be to
continu in the origin direct cross the intersect street and continu around
the block
twovehicl surveil
thi techniqu us two vehicl to follow the subject at differ distanc on the same
street as in the ab method of foot surveil thi techniqu can be vari by have
on vehicl go in the same direct as the subject on a parallel street while receiv
radiotransmit direct from the observ directli behind the subject thi techniqu is
more flexibl becaus the two vehicl can chang place from time to time
fix surveil
a fix surveil or stakeout is us when the subject remain stationari the observ
can move around for closer observ when on observ is detail to watch a place
with more than on exit he might have to move about consider when prepar for a
stakeout the base of oper should be well plan it might be a store apart
hous automobil or truck a thorough but cautiousarea reconnaiss should be
conduct necessari equip should be readili avail such as binocular electron
investig aid camera and sound record devic
satellit surveil
although fraud examin will rare need it satellit data ar now avail for a rel
small amount an examin can bui detail imag from nearli anywher in the world
plant secur lend itself to satellit imageri in addit to provid much of the same
inform as convent satellit photograph multispectr imageri can detect muddi
ground path taken by peopl and vehicl and other inform that might help identifi
potenti secur problem
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3311
satellit imageri can be us in surveil if it is combin with more tradit type of
photograph intellig thi is especi true for larg estat or industri site where
aerial photographi is prohibit it also can be benefici in a covert oper
satellit imageri can help to determin wai to penetr a site develop a map of the
ground and identifi import area in addit satellit imageri can be us to
investig area that ar too remot expens or danger to send oper
bui satellit imageri is simpl if the latitud and longitud of the target is known the
product rang from photograph print of the imag to magnet tape of geograph
correct data print not much differ from the enlarg from a film processor ar
usual the cheapest product while thei dont allow sophist enhanc thei onli
requir a magnifi glass to examin
the next most expens product is a transpar or a neg it allow the interpret to
make print and is conveni for exhibit with an overhead projector stereogram ar
pair of imag that show the same object from slightli differ posit and provid a
threedimension view when look at with stereoscop glass thei ar avail as either
print or transpar magnet tape is the digit version of the imag a particularli
sophist analysi of the target is possibl with magnet tape
night surveil equip
basic there ar two type of night view devic activ and passiv the activ type put
out it own light sourc an infrar beam which is visibl to the user through the infrar
scope that is part of the unit the advantag of the activ type of night view devic is that
the user can see in total dark disadvantag includ limit rang and the fact that the
infrar beam is visibl to anyon look through an infrar scope or through a passiv
night view devic
the passiv type of night view devic electron amplifi whatev exist light is in
the environ such as moonlight or sky glow thi is why such unit sometim ar
refer to as starlight scope night view devic have been in us sinc 1969 their
primari purpos is to allow the observ of event occur more than on block awai at
night night view devic with adapt can be attach to the front of camera to
obtain evid that will stand up in court televis videotap movi and still photo
can all be obtain us night view devic
covert examin investig
3312 2011 fraud examin manual
