2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Sources and Informants 
Sources and informants both serve the same purpose—to provide information to help 
develop a case. However, there are notable differences between confidential sources and 
confidential informants. The terms should not be used interchangeably.  
 
A confidential source  furnishes information as a result of occupation or profession and has no 
culpability in the alleged offense. For example, confidential sources might include barbers, 
attorneys, accountants, and law enforcement personnel. A confidential informant  has a direct or 
indirect involvement in the matter under investigation, and might be culpable. The 
distinction between the two is their involvement in the offense. Informants can pose 
treacherous legal issues for the examiner.  
 
Tom Melsheimer, a former federal prosecutor, suggests from his experience that no piece of 
evidence is quite as convincing to a jury as a secretly photographed or recorded conversation 
that an informant can obtain firsthand. This information is generally accepted as a “slam 
dunk” for a criminal prosecutor, because there is  little that a white-collar criminal can dispute 
when caught in the act of a fraud. For this reason, the use of informants is likely to increase 
in future fraud investigations. 
 
Types of Informants 
In the book Criminal Investigations, authors Paul B. Weston and Kenneth M. Wells identify 
several different types of informants: the basic lead, the participant, the covert, and the 
accomplice/witness. 
  
Basic Lead Informants 
This type of informant supplies information to the police about illicit activities that they have 
encountered. The reasons that the informant decides to supply information are varied; some 
informants simply want to “do their part” to stop an unscrupulous activity, while others are 
interested in harming the criminals against whom they are informing. For instance, many 
informants in the drug, prostitution, or illegal gambling areas are involved in those areas as 
well and intend to eliminate some of their competition. Whatever the reason, these 
informants’ only role in a covert investigation is to supply law enforcement with 
information. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.313 
Participant Informants 
The participant informant is directly involved in gathering preliminary evidence in the 
investigation. The informant in this instance not only supplies an investigation with 
information, but the informant is also involved in setting up a “sting” operation, initiating 
contact with the criminal for arrest purposes. A participant informant is just what the name 
suggests—a participant in the investigation of fraudulent or criminal activity.  
 
Covert Informants 
A covert informant serves the same basic function that any other type of informant does by 
supplying information to authorities on criminal behavior. The difference in this category is 
that a covert informant is one who has been embedded in a situation or scenario for a 
number of years and is called upon only sporadically for tip-offs and leads. These types of 
informants are often referred to as moles, because of the nature of their insulated situation as 
inside sources. Weston and Wells identify two instances in which covert informants are 
commonly used: in organized crime and hate-extremist group investigations, covert 
informants are often culled to get information about upcoming criminal activities by  
the groups. 
 
Accomplice/Witness Informants 
The accomplice/witness informant is called upon by investigators quite often to provide 
information on criminal activity. The distinction in this category is that if the 
accomplice/witness informant were not feeding information to investigators, he would be 
liable to be prosecuted for the same offense. The accomplice informant is often persuaded 
to “spill the beans” on a co-conspirator in exchange for leniency in the prosecution phase of 
the investigation. 
 
Objectives of Source and Informant Information 
There are three essential procedures when using sources and informants. First, to keep the 
person’s identity as confidential as possible. Second, to independently verify the information 
provided by the source or informant. Third, to develop witness and documentary evidence 
from independently verified information.  
 
If the confidential source or informant has provided documents, names of potential 
witnesses, or other evidence, all reasonable steps must be taken to protect the identity of that 
source. Care should be taken to ensure that questioning of other witnesses is done in a 
manner that does not reveal its origin. This can usually be accomplished through the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
phrasing of questions. For example, Mary Rodriguez De La Garza furnished confidential 
information about Linda Reed Collins. When the examiner confronts Collins, he does not 
want her to know that he has talked to Ms. De La Garza. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
“Ms. Collins, someone told me you were taking kickbacks.” 
 
RIGHT 
“Ms. Collins, I have information indicating  you are taking money from a vendor.” 
 
You have made the confrontation direct, but you have not revealed the origin of your 
information. If Collins presses to learn how you knew: 
 
Ms. Collins: 
“Who did you get that information from?”  
 
Examiner: 
“Documents I have from the company’s records, plus other inquiries conducted in this matter.” 
 
In this example, if need be, the examiner would display the evidence from witnesses and 
documents that would not reveal the source or informant’s identity. The information from 
the source or informant is basically useless unless the examiner can verify its authenticity and 
independently corroborate it. Suppose a source furnishes the examiner with copies of 
accounts payable documents showing that Bailey Books Incorporated’s cost of materials has 
increased by 16 percent since Linda Reed Collins took over the account at the Orion 
Corporation. This kind of evidence would corroborate the source’s story. If a source told the 
examiner that Collins frequently had drinks with Jim Nagel, the account representative for 
Orion, the examiner would want to find out some way to verify this report. The third 
objective when using sources is to develop the witness’s information and other evidence so 
that it makes a cohesive case.  
 
Recruitment of Sources and Informants 
Fraud examiners should recall the need to develop sources. Business and financial institution 
executives, law enforcement and other governmental personnel, medical and educational 
professionals, and internal and external auditors are good contacts for fraud examiners.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.315 
The examiner should make contacts in the community well in advance of needing 
information; this is simply good public relations. If the fraud examiner receives an allegation 
and needs confidential information, perhaps a source cultivated earlier can assist. Sources 
need to feel confident that they can share information without being compromised. In 
theory, the source will never have to testify; he has no firsthand knowledge, his information 
comes from a witness or document. 
 
The examiner might also meet sources when tracking leads during a specific investigation. 
He might interview a stockbroker from whom the target purchased stock who does not want 
his identity revealed. The examiner should not encourage a person to provide confidential 
information, but rather try to get reports on the record. But if the source’s information must 
be kept confidential, abide by that promise.  
 
Active recruitment of informants is generally not desirable; it might appear untoward to a 
jury. It is better to encourage an informant to come forward. It is desirable to develop an 
informant relationship, but this situation must be handled carefully. The examiner must 
clearly document an adequate predication for informant’s involvement. The most serious 
question is the culpability of the informant. There have been cases where the informant is 
guiltier than the target. The court might rule that the informant’s information cannot be 
introduced.  
 
Motives of Sources and Informants 
Sources 
In some instances (but not many), the source might want money or other consideration for 
furnishing information. The examiner should not offer any compensation. It is better to 
have the source request it. This is to avoid any allegation of misconduct on the part of the 
examiner for paying for information. Sources have their reasons for informing. It might be 
the sense of importance that comes from being involved or a chance to play “detective.” In 
other cases, the source might have a grudge against the target. Other reasons include a 
feeling of moral responsibility to report information. Perhaps more than any other reason, a 
source will furnish information because he likes and trusts the examiner and wants to help. 
 
Informants 
Informants, especially incidental ones, commonly want something in return for their 
information. They take the attitude that their involvement has personal risk, and they want 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to be paid for their “trouble.” The informant is likely to be predisposed to sell information 
to the highest bidder.  
 
Many informants—perhaps the majority—are unstable. As often as not, an informant’s 
motivation is to “get” the target, not because  of any sense of morality, but because the 
informant and the target are closely involved. In the case of drug dealing, for example, an 
informant might furnish information because the target is the competition. In other cases, 
the informant is motivated by a sense of self-importance. He is a “big man”; people take  
him seriously. 
 
Probably the most common reason informants supply information is because they are 
involved in the offense, and by furnishing information on the target (which is commonly 
false), they can diffuse suspicion from their own activities. In many instances, the examiner 
initially does not know the truth about the informant.  
 
The fraud examiner must also be aware of the overzealous informant. Melsheimer cautions 
that most of the recently catalogued cases concerning the abuse of informants were the 
result of “involved informants who are private citizens, self-motivated to satisfy their law 
enforcement sponsors at virtually any cost.” In an attempt to ingratiate themselves to 
investigators, the informant will often engage in unscrupulous activities to provide the 
information they think the investigators are looking for. The fraud examiner must lay out the 
ground rules for the informant before beginning this type of investigation or risk the 
embarrassment (and punishment) that a less-than-truthful informant can provide.  
 
Legal Considerations 
As noted, dealing with sources and informants is fraught with legal pitfalls. The examiner 
should be circumspect in all interactions with sources and informants. The examiner might 
be able to trust a source, but rarely an informant. Always document contacts with sources 
and informants in case of problems.  
 
Many jurisdictions guarantee the accused the right to confront his accuser. That is an 
absolute right of the accused; it is not possible to cross-examine someone who lurks behind 
a cloak of secrecy. The examiner will usually not be able to testify to what a source or 
informant said because of the “hearsay” rule. The witness can testify only to what he knows, 
not what someone else has said.  
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.317 
If a decision is made to pay an informant or source, the payment should be made in cash and 
a receipt should be secured. If the source will not sign a receipt, do not pay. There have been 
numerous instances where a receipt was not obtained and the informant subsequently denied 
receiving funds or challenged the amount. The examiner then has to defend himself without 
proof; indeed, some investigators have been accused of having embezzled the payments. 
Payments should only be on a COD basis. The information should be furnished and verified 
before turning over any money. If not, the examiner might become the victim of a scam.  
 
Entrapment is sometimes raised as a criminal defense. This is especially true when the 
informant is doing things at the behest of law enforcement. The defense is that the target is 
innocent, but was unlawfully lured into a crime that he otherwise would not have 
committed. This can best be overcome by ensuring that the source or informant only gathers 
information and plays a limited role in the case.  
 
Reporting Contacts 
It is recommended that all contact with informants and sources be reported on a 
memorandum of interview, although the confidential source or informant’s identity should 
not be included in the report. Symbols to denote the informant’s identity should be used. It 
is further recommended that sources be preceded with an “S” followed by a unique identifier 
(i.e., source #1 would be “S-1”; source #2 would be “S-2”). The symbols for informants 
would then be “I-1” and “I-2.”  
 
As a general rule, disclosure of the identities of sources and informants should be on a strict 
need-to-know basis. For that reason, the person’s identity should be maintained in a secure 
file with limited access and cross-indexed by his symbol number. The reliability of the 
source, if known, and whether the person is in a position to furnish relevant information 
should both be noted in writing. 
 
 EXAMPLE 
“A source of unknown reliability, but in a position to furnish relevant  
information (hereinafter referred to as S-1), advised as follows:” 
OR 
“An informant of known reliability and in a position to furnish relevant information 
(hereinafter referred to as I-2) advised as follows:” 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.318   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The fraud examiner is not in a position to promise leniency to people involved in the 
commission of a crime or tort. To do so is serious misconduct and a violation of the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics. Promises of leniency can only 
come from the prosecutor or the courts. The examiner might truthfully tell the informant 
that his cooperation will be made known to the authorities, and that people who cooperate 
are generally treated better.  
 
For reasons previously discussed, it is best not to use sources and informants in ongoing 
crimes as “double agents.” Such action is inherently risky and places the examiner in the 
position of having to defend the actions of the source or informant, actions that, in most 
cases, the examiner cannot control. This leaves the case open to attack during legal 
proceedings. If it appears critical that the source be used as an agent, get the approval of the 
prosecutor and/or attorney before proceeding.  
 
Promises of Confidentiality 
Fraud examiners are not in a position to offer unqualified confidentiality. Therefore, any 
promises made to an informant or source should be qualified. In the case of an examiner 
who is employed by a governmental agency, there might be an absolute duty not to hold 
sources and informants in confidence. In many law enforcement agencies, an investigator 
might not have informants or sources who are unknown to the agency. Governmental 
agencies also regularly share information on criminal investigations with prosecutors, 
including the identity of the source of information. The same regulations and considerations 
could govern business entities.  
 
EXAMPLE 
During the examination of Collins, you contact Roger McGuire, a coworker of Collins’s. 
McGuire will talk to you only in confidence. You know Bailey’s polici es are to prosecute all 
criminal offenses. McGuire seems to be the key to making a case against Collins. You believe 
you can independently verify the allegations McGuire furnishes, but you will not be certain until 
you talk to him. It might be necessary to call  McGuire to testify against Collins in order to 
make the case. 
 
WRONG 
 “Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell  anyone about your talking to me.” 
 
  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.319 
RIGHT 
“Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell Ms. Collins about your talking to me.” 
 
The second is a conditional promise; the examiner will not directly tell Collins, but that 
doesn’t mean someone else won’t. At some point, informants and sources often become 
witnesses. Under no circumstances should an examiner promise a source or informant that 
his identity will not become known. 
 
 



:


sourc and inform
sourc and inform both serv the same purposeto provid inform to help
develop a case howev there ar notabl differ between confidenti sourc and
confidenti inform the term should not be us interchang
a confidenti sourc furnish inform as a result of occup or profess and ha no
culpabl in the alleg offens for exampl confidenti sourc might includ barber
attornei account and law enforc personnel a confidenti inform ha a direct or
indirect involv in the matter under investig and might be culpabl the
distinct between the two is their involv in the offens inform can pose
treacher legal issu for the examin
tom melsheim a former feder prosecutor suggest from hi experi that no piec of
evid is quit as convinc to a juri as a secretli photograph or record convers
that an inform can obtain firsthand thi inform is gener accept as a slam
dunk for a crimin prosecutor becaus there is littl that a whitecollar crimin can disput
when caught in the act of a fraud for thi reason the us of inform is like to increas
in futur fraud investig
type of inform
in the book crimin investig author paul b weston and kenneth m well identifi
sever differ type of inform the basic lead the particip the covert and the
accomplicewit
basic lead inform
thi type of inform suppli inform to the polic about illicit activ that thei have
encount the reason that the inform decid to suppli inform ar vari some
inform simpli want to do their part to stop an unscrupul activ while other ar
interest in harm the crimin against whom thei ar inform for instanc mani
inform in the drug prostitut or illeg gambl area ar involv in those area as
well and intend to elimin some of their competit whatev the reason these
inform onli role in a covert investig is to suppli law enforc with
inform
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3313
particip inform
the particip inform is directli involv in gather preliminari evid in the
investig the inform in thi instanc not onli suppli an investig with
inform but the inform is also involv in set up a sting oper initi
contact with the crimin for arrest purpos a particip inform is just what the name
suggestsa particip in the investig of fraudul or crimin activ
covert inform
a covert inform serv the same basic function that ani other type of inform doe by
suppli inform to author on crimin behavior the differ in thi categori is
that a covert inform is on who ha been embed in a situat or scenario for a
number of year and is call upon onli sporad for tipoff and lead these type of
inform ar often refer to as mole becaus of the natur of their insul situat as
insid sourc weston and well identifi two instanc in which covert inform ar
commonli us in organ crime and hateextremist group investig covert
inform ar often cull to get inform about upcom crimin activ by
the group
accomplicewit inform
the accomplicewit inform is call upon by investig quit often to provid
inform on crimin activ the distinct in thi categori is that if the
accomplicewit inform were not feed inform to investig he would be
liabl to be prosecut for the same offens the accomplic inform is often persuad
to spill the bean on a coconspir in exchang for lenienc in the prosecut phase of
the investig
object of sourc and inform inform
there ar three essenti procedur when us sourc and inform first to keep the
person ident as confidenti as possibl second to independ verifi the inform
provid by the sourc or inform third to develop wit and documentari evid
from independ verifi inform
if the confidenti sourc or inform ha provid document name of potenti
wit or other evid all reason step must be taken to protect the ident of that
sourc care should be taken to ensur that question of other wit is done in a
manner that doe not reveal it origin thi can usual be accomplish through the
covert examin investig
3314 2011 fraud examin manual
phrase of question for exampl mari rodriguez de la garza furnish confidenti
inform about linda reed collin when the examin confront collin he doe not
want her to know that he ha talk to ms de la garza
exampl
wrong
ms collin someon told me you were take kickback
right
ms collin i have inform indic you ar take monei from a vendor
you have made the confront direct but you have not reveal the origin of your
inform if collin press to learn how you knew
ms collin
who did you get that inform from
examin
document i have from the compani record plu other inquiri conduct in thi matter
in thi exampl if need be the examin would displai the evid from wit and
document that would not reveal the sourc or inform ident the inform from
the sourc or inform is basic useless unless the examin can verifi it authent and
independ corrobor it suppos a sourc furnish the examin with copi of
account payabl document show that bailei book incorpor cost of materi ha
increas by 16 percent sinc linda reed collin took over the account at the orion
corpor thi kind of evid would corrobor the sourc stori if a sourc told the
examin that collin frequent had drink with jim nagel the account repres for
orion the examin would want to find out some wai to verifi thi report the third
object when us sourc is to develop the witnesss inform and other evid so
that it make a cohes case
recruit of sourc and inform
fraud examin should recal the need to develop sourc busi and financi institut
execut law enforc and other government personnel medic and educ
profession and intern and extern auditor ar good contact for fraud examin
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3315
the examin should make contact in the commun well in advanc of need
inform thi is simpli good public relat if the fraud examin receiv an alleg
and need confidenti inform perhap a sourc cultiv earlier can assist sourc
need to feel confid that thei can share inform without be compromis in
theori the sourc will never have to testifi he ha no firsthand knowledg hi inform
come from a wit or document
the examin might also meet sourc when track lead dure a specif investig
he might interview a stockbrok from whom the target purchas stock who doe not want
hi ident reveal the examin should not encourag a person to provid confidenti
inform but rather try to get report on the record but if the sourc inform must
be kept confidenti abid by that promis
activ recruit of inform is gener not desir it might appear untoward to a
juri it is better to encourag an inform to come forward it is desir to develop an
inform relationship but thi situat must be handl carefulli the examin must
clearli document an adequ predic for inform involv the most seriou
question is the culpabl of the inform there have been case where the inform is
guiltier than the target the court might rule that the inform inform cannot be
introduc
motiv of sourc and inform
sourc
in some instanc but not mani the sourc might want monei or other consider for
furnish inform the examin should not offer ani compens it is better to
have the sourc request it thi is to avoid ani alleg of misconduct on the part of the
examin for pai for inform sourc have their reason for inform it might be
the sens of import that come from be involv or a chanc to plai detect in
other case the sourc might have a grudg against the target other reason includ a
feel of moral respons to report inform perhap more than ani other reason a
sourc will furnish inform becaus he like and trust the examin and want to help
inform
inform especi incident on commonli want someth in return for their
inform thei take the attitud that their involv ha person risk and thei want
covert examin investig
3316 2011 fraud examin manual
to be paid for their troubl the inform is like to be predispos to sell inform
to the highest bidder
mani informantsperhap the majorityar unstabl as often as not an inform
motiv is to get the target not becaus of ani sens of moral but becaus the
inform and the target ar close involv in the case of drug deal for exampl an
inform might furnish inform becaus the target is the competit in other case
the inform is motiv by a sens of selfimport he is a big man peopl take
him serious
probabl the most common reason inform suppli inform is becaus thei ar
involv in the offens and by furnish inform on the target which is commonli
fals thei can diffus suspicion from their own activ in mani instanc the examin
initi doe not know the truth about the inform
the fraud examin must also be awar of the overzeal inform melsheim caution
that most of the recent catalogu case concern the abus of inform were the
result of involv inform who ar privat citizen selfmotiv to satisfi their law
enforc sponsor at virtual ani cost in an attempt to ingrati themselv to
investig the inform will often engag in unscrupul activ to provid the
inform thei think the investig ar look for the fraud examin must lai out the
ground rule for the inform befor begin thi type of investig or risk the
embarrass and punish that a lessthantruth inform can provid
legal consider
as note deal with sourc and inform is fraught with legal pitfal the examin
should be circumspect in all interact with sourc and inform the examin might
be abl to trust a sourc but rare an inform alwai document contact with sourc
and inform in case of problem
mani jurisdict guarante the accus the right to confront hi accus that is an
absolut right of the accus it is not possibl to crossexamin someon who lurk behind
a cloak of secreci the examin will usual not be abl to testifi to what a sourc or
inform said becaus of the hearsai rule the wit can testifi onli to what he know
not what someon els ha said
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3317
if a decis is made to pai an inform or sourc the payment should be made in cash and
a receipt should be secur if the sourc will not sign a receipt do not pai there have been
numer instanc where a receipt wa not obtain and the inform subsequ deni
receiv fund or challeng the amount the examin then ha to defend himself without
proof inde some investig have been accus of have embezzl the payment
payment should onli be on a cod basi the inform should be furnish and verifi
befor turn over ani monei if not the examin might becom the victim of a scam
entrap is sometim rais as a crimin defens thi is especi true when the
inform is do thing at the behest of law enforc the defens is that the target is
innoc but wa unlawfulli lure into a crime that he otherwis would not have
commit thi can best be overcom by ensur that the sourc or inform onli gather
inform and plai a limit role in the case
report contact
it is recommend that all contact with inform and sourc be report on a
memorandum of interview although the confidenti sourc or inform ident should
not be includ in the report symbol to denot the inform ident should be us it
is further recommend that sourc be preced with an s follow by a uniqu identifi
ie sourc 1 would be s1 sourc 2 would be s2 the symbol for inform
would then be i1 and i2
as a gener rule disclosur of the ident of sourc and inform should be on a strict
needtoknow basi for that reason the person ident should be maintain in a secur
file with limit access and crossindex by hi symbol number the reliabl of the
sourc if known and whether the person is in a posit to furnish relev inform
should both be note in write
exampl
a sourc of unknown reliabl but in a posit to furnish relev
inform hereinaft refer to as s1 advis as follow
or
an inform of known reliabl and in a posit to furnish relev inform
hereinaft refer to as i2 advis as follow
covert examin investig
3318 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud examin is not in a posit to promis lenienc to peopl involv in the
commiss of a crime or tort to do so is seriou misconduct and a violat of the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic promis of lenienc can onli
come from the prosecutor or the court the examin might truthfulli tell the inform
that hi cooper will be made known to the author and that peopl who cooper
ar gener treat better
for reason previous discuss it is best not to us sourc and inform in ongo
crime as doubl agent such action is inher riski and place the examin in the
posit of have to defend the action of the sourc or inform action that in most
case the examin cannot control thi leav the case open to attack dure legal
proceed if it appear critic that the sourc be us as an agent get the approv of the
prosecutor andor attornei befor proceed
promis of confidenti
fraud examin ar not in a posit to offer unqualifi confidenti therefor ani
promis made to an inform or sourc should be qualifi in the case of an examin
who is emploi by a government agenc there might be an absolut duti not to hold
sourc and inform in confid in mani law enforc agenc an investig
might not have inform or sourc who ar unknown to the agenc government
agenc also regularli share inform on crimin investig with prosecutor
includ the ident of the sourc of inform the same regul and consider
could govern busi entiti
exampl
dure the examin of collin you contact roger mcguir a cowork of collinss
mcguir will talk to you onli in confid you know bailei polici es ar to prosecut all
crimin offens mcguir seem to be the kei to make a case against collin you believ
you can independ verifi the alleg mcguir furnish but you will not be certain until
you talk to him it might be necessari to call mcguir to testifi against collin in order to
make the case
wrong
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell anyon about your talk to me
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3319
right
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell ms collin about your talk to me
the second is a condit promis the examin will not directli tell collin but that
doesnt mean someon els wont at some point inform and sourc often becom
wit under no circumst should an examin promis a sourc or inform that
hi ident will not becom known
