2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/External Auditors/Risk-Based Audit Approach


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


Risk-Based Audit Approach 
The PCAOB and the AICPA have issued standards that indicate both organizations’ 
emphasis on using a risk-based approach to auditing. This approach involves beginning the 
audit process with a risk assessment and selecting the particular areas of focus based upon 
the level of risk to the organization. In a risk-based approach, auditors focus their resources 
on the areas of highest concern as opposed to auditing areas on a rotational basis or other 
method of selecting audit areas. This works well for both internal and external audits, and 
also works well at both the macro (e.g., overall financial statements or the organization as a 
whole) and micro (e.g., accounts payable) levels.  
 
As the risk of fraud is significant in most organizations, it is normally a major factor in the 
risk assessment process. Focusing audit resources on the areas with the highest risk of fraud 
gives auditors a significantly higher probability of detecting fraud if/when it occurs. 
 
The standards go into effect for fiscal periods beginning on or after December 15, 2010.   
 
The PCAOB standards include: 
• AS No. 8 — Audit Risk 
• AS No. 9 — Audit Planning 
• AS No. 10 — Supervision of the Audit Engagement 
• AS No. 11 — Consideration of Materiality in Planning and Performing the Audit 
• AS No. 12 — Identifying and Assessing Risks of Ma terial Misstatement 
• AS No. 13 — The Auditor’s Responses to  the Risks of Material Misstatement 
• AS No. 14 — Evaluating Audit Results 
• AS No. 15 — Audit Evidence 
 
• The AICPA standards include: 
• AU section 326—Audit Evidence 
• AU section 312—Materiality in Planning and Performing an Audit 
• AU section 312—Evaluation of Misstatements Identified During an Audit 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.240                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• AU section 311—Planning an Audit 
• AU section 314—Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the 
Risks of Mat erial Misstatement 
• AU section 318—Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks and 
Evaluating the Audit Evidence Obtained 
 
The specific details of the standards can be found at the PCAOB website at 
www.pcaobus.org and at the AICPA website at www.aicpa.org 
 



:


riskbas audit approach
the pcaob and the aicpa have issu standard that indic both organ
emphasi on us a riskbas approach to audit thi approach involv begin the
audit process with a risk assess and select the particular area of focu base upon
the level of risk to the organ in a riskbas approach auditor focu their resourc
on the area of highest concern as oppos to audit area on a rotat basi or other
method of select audit area thi work well for both intern and extern audit and
also work well at both the macro eg overal financi statement or the organ as a
whole and micro eg account payabl level
as the risk of fraud is signific in most organ it is normal a major factor in the
risk assess process focus audit resourc on the area with the highest risk of fraud
give auditor a significantli higher probabl of detect fraud ifwhen it occur
the standard go into effect for fiscal period begin on or after decemb 15 2010
the pcaob standard includ
as no 8 audit risk
as no 9 audit plan
as no 10 supervis of the audit engag
as no 11 consider of materi in plan and perform the audit
as no 12 identifi and assess risk of ma terial misstat
as no 13 the auditor respons to the risk of materi misstat
as no 14 evalu audit result
as no 15 audit evid
the aicpa standard includ
au section 326audit evid
au section 312materi in plan and perform an audit
au section 312evalu of misstat identifi dure an audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1240 2011 fraud examin manual
au section 311plan an audit
au section 314understand the entiti and it environ and assess the
risk of mat erial misstat
au section 318perform audit procedur in respons to assess risk and
evalu the audit evid obtain
the specif detail of the standard can be found at the pcaob websit at
wwwpcaobusorg and at the aicpa websit at wwwaicpaorg
