2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/Certified Fraud Examiners/Assist in the Detection and Prevention of Fraud/SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY 
 
This is only a SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY (DRP), and is NOT LEGAL 
ADVICE. It is only an example of a general DRP and should not be used without revision to meet the 
particular administrative and legal needs of your organi zation. There are many federal, state, and local laws 
that require organizations to retain documents for a certain period of time that may not be represented in this 
sample policy. All companies should contact counsel licensed to practice law in their state before implementing 
a DRP. 
 
I. Purpose  
 
To ensure the most efficient and effective operation of ORGANIZATION (Organization), we are 
implementing this Document Retention Policy (DRP or policy). The records of Organization and its 
subsidiaries are important to the proper functioning of Organization. Our records include virtually all 
of the records you produce as an Organization employee. Such records can be in electronic or paper 
form. Thus, items that you may not consider important, such as interoffice e-mails, desktop 
calendars, and printed memoranda are records that are considered important under this policy. If you 
are ever uncertain as to any procedures set forth in this policy (e.g., what records to retain or destroy, 
when to do so, or how to do so) it is your responsibility to seek answers from Organization’s DRP 
Manager. 
 
The goals of this DRP are to: 
 
1. Retain important documents for reference and future use; 
2. Delete documents that are no longer necessary for the proper functioning of Organization; 
3. Organize important documents for efficient retrieval; and 
4. Ensure that you, as an Organization employee, know what documents should be retained, 
the length of their retention, means of storage, and when and how they should be destroyed. 
 
Federal and state laws require Organization to maintain certain types of records for particular 
periods. Failure to maintain such records could subject you and Organization to penalties and fines, 
obstruct justice, spoil legal evidence, and/or seriously harm Organization’s position in litigation. 
Thus, it is imperative that you fully understand and comply with this, and any future records 
retention or destruction policies and schedules, UNLESS you have been notified by Organization, or 
if you believe that (1) such records are or could be relevant to any future litigation, (2) there is a 
dispute that could lead to litigation, or (3) Organization is a party to a lawsuit, in which case you 
MUST PRESERVE such records until Organization’s legal counsel determines that the records are 
no longer needed.  
 
“Records” discussed herein refers to all business records of Organization (and is used 
interchangeably with “documents”), including written, printed, and recorded materials, as well as 
electronic records (i.e., e-mails and documents saved electronically). All business records shall be 
retained for a period no longer than necessary for the proper conduct and functioning of 
Organization. No business records shall be retained longer than five (5) years, EXCEPT  those that 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.261 
(1) have time periods provided for herein, (2) are in the Document Retention Schedule, found at 
Appendix “A,” or (3) are specifically exempted by Organization’s DRP Manager.  
 
II. Management  
 
To ensure compliance with this DRP, Organization’s DRP Manager is responsible for the following 
oversight functions: 
 
• Implementing the DRP; 
• Ensuring that employees are properly educated, understand, and follow the DRP’s purpose; 
• Providing oversight on actual retention and destruction of documents;  
• Ensuring proper storage of documents; 
• Periodically following-up with counsel to ensure proper retention periods are in place;  
• Ensuring the proper storage of documents; 
• Suspending the destruction of documents upon foreseeable litigation; and 
• Keeping corporate officers, directors, and employees informed of changes in relation to the 
DRP. 
 
Organization’s DRP Manager shall annually review the DRP, modify it accordingly, and inform and 
educate all Organization employees on any such changes. All questions relating to document 
retention and/or destruction should be directly addressed to Organization’s DRP Manager. 
 
III. Types of Records 
 
Appendix “A,” attached at the end of this DRP, lists several categories of records, as well as specific 
records that contain specific retention periods. This is referred to as a Document Retention Schedule 
(DRS). All records not provided for in the DRS or described herein, shall be classified into three 
types: (1) Temporary Records, (2) Final Records, and (3) Permanent Records. 1   
 
Temporary Records 
 
Temporary records consist of all business documents that have not been completed, including, but 
not limited to: written memoranda and dictation to be typed in the future; reminders; to-do lists; 
report, case study, and calculation drafts; interoffice correspondence regarding a client or business 
transaction; and running logs. 
 
Temporary records can be destroyed, or permanently deleted if in electronic form (see protocol 
below for proper destruction of data in electronic form), when a project/case/file closes. Upon the 
closing of a project/case/file, gather and review all such temporary records. Before you destroy or 
permanently delete these documents, make sure you have duplicates of all the final records pertaining 
                                                          
1 See Ashcraft, H., Document Retention:  Gu idelines for Managing Project Files, February 2002. Available at 
http://terrarrg.com/images/pdfs/DocumentRetention.pdf.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.262                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to the project/case/file. Upon destruction or deletion, organize the final records (and duplicates) in a 
file marked “FINAL” and store them appropriately. 
 
Final Records 
 
Final records include all business documents that are not superseded by modification or addition, 
such as, but not limited to: documents given (or sent via electronic form) to any third-party not 
employed by Organization or government agency, final memoranda and reports, correspondence, 
handwritten telephone memoranda not further transcribed, minutes, design/plan specifications, 
journal entries, and cost estimates. All accounting records shall be deemed final. 
 
Except as provided for in the DRS, all final documents are to be discarded 10 years after the close of 
a project/case/file. 
 
Permanent Records 
 
Permanent records include all business documents that define Organization’s scope of work, 
expressions of professional opinions, research, and reference materials, and include, but are not 
limited to: contracts, proposals, materials referenc ing expert opinions, annual financial statements, 
federal tax returns, payroll registers, copyright registration, and patents.  
 
Except as provided for in the Document Retention Schedule (Appendix “A”), all permanent 
documents are to be retained indefinitely. 
 
Accounting and Corporate Tax Records 
 
Accounting and corporate tax records include, but are not limited to: financial statements; ledgers; 
audit records; invoices and expense records; federal, state, and property tax returns; payroll; 
accounting procedures; gross receipts; customer records; and purchases.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of six years 
or until the statute of limitations for a particular record expires (please consult Organization’s counsel 
for time periods if you manage/control such records). 
 
Workplace Records 
 
Workplace records include, but are not limited to: Articles of Incorporation; bylaws; meeting 
minutes; deeds and titles; leases; policy statements; contracts and agreements; and patents and 
trademark records.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained in perpetuity. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.263 
Employment, Employee, and Payroll Records 
 
Employment records include, but are not limited to: job announcements and advertisements, 
employment applications, background investigations, resumes, and letters of recommendation for 
persons not hired.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of one year. 
 
Employee records include, but are not limited to: employment applications, background 
investigations, resumes, and letters of recommendation of current and past employees; and records 
relating to current and past employees’ performance reviews and complaints.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of three years 
following unemployment with Organization. 
 
Payroll records include, but are not limited to: wage rate tables; salary histor y; current rate of pay; 
payroll deductions; time cards; forms W-2 and W-4; and bonuses.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of six years. 
 
Bank Records 
 
Bank records include, but are not limited to: bank deposits, check copies, stop payment orders, bank 
statements, check signature authorizations, and bank reconciliations.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of three 
years. 
 
Legal Records  
 
Legal records include, but are not limited to: a ll contracts; all legal records, statements, and 
correspondence; trademark and copyright registrations; patents; personal injury records and 
statements; press releases; and public findings.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of 10 years. 
 
Historical Records 
 
Historical records are those that are no longer of use to Organization, but by virtue of their age or 
research value may be of historical interest or significance to Organization. Historical records should 
be retained indefinitely. 
 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.264                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
IV. Storage  
 
Tangible Records 
 
Tangible records are those which you must physically move to store, such as paper records (including 
printed versions of electronically saved documents), photographs, audio recordings, advertisements, 
and promotional items. Active records and records that need to be readily accessible may be stored in 
Organization’s office space or equipment. Inactive records can be sent to Organization’s off-site 
storage facility. 
 
Electronic Records 
 
Electronic mail (e-mail) should be either printed and stored as tangible evidence, or stored 
electronically.  
 
Organization has computer software that duplicates files, which are then backed up on central 
servers. If you have a notebook computer from Organization that you work on out of the office, 
your computer contains synchronization software that duplicates and backs up files when you log 
into the network. However, it is important that all employees take precautionary measures to save 
work and records on Organization’s network drive. 
 
V. Destruction / Deletion  
 
Tangible Records 
 
Tangible records should be destroyed by shredding or some other means that will render them 
unreadable. If you have a record that you do not know how to destroy, such as a photograph, 
compact disk, or tape recording, ask the advice of Organization’s DRP Manager.  
 
Electronic Records 
 
E-mail records that you “delete” remain in Organi zation’s system. Thus, Organization’s information 
technology (IT) department will be responsible for permanently removing deleted e-mails from the 
computer system. 
 
Deleting files and emptying the recycling bin is usually sufficient in most circumstances to get rid of a 
record. However, because electronic records can be stored in many locations, Organization’s IT 
department will be responsible for permanently removing deleted files from the computer system.  
 
Keep in mind, where duplicate records are involved, both must be destroyed/deleted where proper. 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.265 
VI. Cessation of Record  Destruction / Deletion 
 
If a lawsuit is filed or imminent, or a legal document request has been made upon Organization, ALL 
RECORD DESTRUCTION MUST CEASE IMMEDIATELY. Organization’s DRP Manager may 
suspend this DRP to require that documents relating to the lawsuit or potential legal issue(s) be 
retained and organized. A critical understanding of this section is imperative. Should you fail to 
follow this protocol, you and/or Organization may be subject to fines and penalties, among other 
sanctions.  
 
VII. Acknowledgement 
 
I have read and understand the purpose of this DRP. I understand that strict adherence to this DRP 
is a condition of my employment with Organization. If I do not understand something regarding this 
DRP, I will contact Organization’s DRP Manager im mediately for clarification. I agree to abide by 
Organization’s DRP. 
 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ 
Employee’s Signature    Date 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ 
Employee’s Name (print)  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.266                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


sampl document retent polici
thi is onli a sampl document retent polici drp and is not legal
advic it is onli an exampl of a gener drp and should not be us without revis to meet the
particular administr and legal need of your organi zation there ar mani feder state and local law
that requir organ to retain document for a certain period of time that mai not be repres in thi
sampl polici all compani should contact counsel licens to practic law in their state befor implement
a drp
i purpos
to ensur the most effici and effect oper of organ organ we ar
implement thi document retent polici drp or polici the record of organ and it
subsidiari ar import to the proper function of organ our record includ virtual all
of the record you produc as an organ employe such record can be in electron or paper
form thu item that you mai not consid import such as interoffic email desktop
calendar and print memoranda ar record that ar consid import under thi polici if you
ar ever uncertain as to ani procedur set forth in thi polici eg what record to retain or destroi
when to do so or how to do so it is your respons to seek answer from organ drp
manag
the goal of thi drp ar to
1 retain import document for refer and futur us
2 delet document that ar no longer necessari for the proper function of organ
3 organ import document for effici retriev and
4 ensur that you as an organ employe know what document should be retain
the length of their retent mean of storag and when and how thei should be destroi
feder and state law requir organ to maintain certain type of record for particular
period failur to maintain such record could subject you and organ to penalti and fine
obstruct justic spoil legal evid andor serious harm organ posit in litig
thu it is imper that you fulli understand and compli with thi and ani futur record
retent or destruct polici and schedul unless you have been notifi by organ or
if you believ that 1 such record ar or could be relev to ani futur litig 2 there is a
disput that could lead to litig or 3 organ is a parti to a lawsuit in which case you
must preserv such record until organ legal counsel determin that the record ar
no longer need
record discuss herein refer to all busi record of organ and is us
interchang with document includ written print and record materi as well as
electron record ie email and document save electron all busi record shall be
retain for a period no longer than necessari for the proper conduct and function of
organ no busi record shall be retain longer than five 5 year except those that
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1261
1 have time period provid for herein 2 ar in the document retent schedul found at
appendix a or 3 ar specif exempt by organ drp manag
ii manag
to ensur complianc with thi drp organ drp manag is respons for the follow
oversight function
implement the drp
ensur that employe ar properli educ understand and follow the drp purpos
provid oversight on actual retent and destruct of document
ensur proper storag of document
period followingup with counsel to ensur proper retent period ar in place
ensur the proper storag of document
suspend the destruct of document upon forese litig and
keep corpor offic director and employe inform of chang in relat to the
drp
organ drp manag shall annual review the drp modifi it accordingli and inform and
educ all organ employe on ani such chang all question relat to document
retent andor destruct should be directli address to organ drp manag
iii type of record
appendix a attach at the end of thi drp list sever categori of record as well as specif
record that contain specif retent period thi is refer to as a document retent schedul
dr all record not provid for in the dr or describ herein shall be classifi into three
type 1 temporari record 2 final record and 3 perman record 1
temporari record
temporari record consist of all busi document that have not been complet includ but
not limit to written memoranda and dictat to be type in the futur remind todo list
report case studi and calcul draft interoffic correspond regard a client or busi
transact and run log
temporari record can be destroi or perman delet if in electron form see protocol
below for proper destruct of data in electron form when a projectcasefil close upon the
close of a projectcasefil gather and review all such temporari record befor you destroi or
perman delet these document make sure you have duplic of all the final record pertain
1 see ashcraft h document retent gu idelin for manag project file februari 2002 avail at
httpterrarrgcomimagespdfsdocumentretentionpdf
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1262 2011 fraud examin manual
to the projectcasefil upon destruct or delet organ the final record and duplic in a
file mark final and store them appropri
final record
final record includ all busi document that ar not supersed by modif or addit
such as but not limit to document given or sent via electron form to ani thirdparti not
emploi by organ or govern agenc final memoranda and report correspond
handwritten telephon memoranda not further transcrib minut designplan specif
journal entri and cost estim all account record shall be deem final
except as provid for in the dr all final document ar to be discard 10 year after the close of
a projectcasefil
perman record
perman record includ all busi document that defin organ scope of work
express of profession opinion research and refer materi and includ but ar not
limit to contract propos materi referenc ing expert opinion annual financi statement
feder tax return payrol regist copyright registr and patent
except as provid for in the document retent schedul appendix a all perman
document ar to be retain indefinit
account and corpor tax record
account and corpor tax record includ but ar not limit to financi statement ledger
audit record invoic and expens record feder state and properti tax return payrol
account procedur gross receipt custom record and purchas
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of six year
or until the statut of limit for a particular record expir pleas consult organ counsel
for time period if you managecontrol such record
workplac record
workplac record includ but ar not limit to articl of incorpor bylaw meet
minut deed and titl leas polici statement contract and agreement and patent and
trademark record
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain in perpetu
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1263
employ employe and payrol record
employ record includ but ar not limit to job announc and advertis
employ applic background investig resum and letter of recommend for
person not hire
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of on year
employe record includ but ar not limit to employ applic background
investig resum and letter of recommend of current and past employe and record
relat to current and past employe perform review and complaint
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of three year
follow unemploy with organ
payrol record includ but ar not limit to wage rate tabl salari histor y current rate of pai
payrol deduct time card form w2 and w4 and bonus
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of six year
bank record
bank record includ but ar not limit to bank deposit check copi stop payment order bank
statement check signatur author and bank reconcili
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of three
year
legal record
legal record includ but ar not limit to a ll contract all legal record statement and
correspond trademark and copyright registr patent person injuri record and
statement press releas and public find
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of 10 year
histor record
histor record ar those that ar no longer of us to organ but by virtu of their ag or
research valu mai be of histor interest or signific to organ histor record should
be retain indefinit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1264 2011 fraud examin manual
iv storag
tangibl record
tangibl record ar those which you must physic move to store such as paper record includ
print version of electron save document photograph audio record advertis
and promot item activ record and record that need to be readili access mai be store in
organ offic space or equip inact record can be sent to organ offsit
storag facil
electron record
electron mail email should be either print and store as tangibl evid or store
electron
organ ha comput softwar that duplic file which ar then back up on central
server if you have a notebook comput from organ that you work on out of the offic
your comput contain synchron softwar that duplic and back up file when you log
into the network howev it is import that all employe take precautionari measur to save
work and record on organ network drive
v destruct delet
tangibl record
tangibl record should be destroi by shred or some other mean that will render them
unread if you have a record that you do not know how to destroi such as a photograph
compact disk or tape record ask the advic of organ drp manag
electron record
email record that you delet remain in organi zation system thu organ inform
technolog it depart will be respons for perman remov delet email from the
comput system
delet file and empti the recycl bin is usual suffici in most circumst to get rid of a
record howev becaus electron record can be store in mani locat organ it
depart will be respons for perman remov delet file from the comput system
keep in mind where duplic record ar involv both must be destroyeddelet where proper
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1265
vi cessat of record destruct delet
if a lawsuit is file or immin or a legal document request ha been made upon organ all
record destruct must ceas immedi organ drp manag mai
suspend thi drp to requir that document relat to the lawsuit or potenti legal issu be
retain and organ a critic understand of thi section is imper should you fail to
follow thi protocol you andor organ mai be subject to fine and penalti among other
sanction
vii acknowledg
i have read and understand the purpos of thi drp i understand that strict adher to thi drp
is a condit of my employ with organ if i do not understand someth regard thi
drp i will contact organ drp manag im mediat for clarif i agre to abid by
organ drp
employe signatur date
employe name print
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1266 2011 fraud examin manual
