2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/False Claims and Statements/Federal Laws Prohibiting False Claims


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Federal Laws Prohibiting False Claims 
There are a number of federal statutes related to false claims and statements made to the 
federal government. Among the most useful are: 
• False, Fictitious, or Fraudulent Claims (18, U.S. Code, § 287) 
• False Statements (18, U.S. Code, § 1001) 
• Conspiracy to Defraud the Government (18, U.S. Code, § 286) 
 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1912                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The Major Fraud Act (18, U.S. Code, § 1031) 
• Obstruction of Federal Audit (18, U.S. Code, §1516) 
 
These statutes are discussed in greater detail in the Law section. There are also a number of 
civil remedies discussed in the Law section including the Civil False Claims Act, Program 
Fraud Civil Remedies, and the Civil Monetary Penalty Law (CMPL). 
 
Under 18 U.S. Code, § 1001, a false statement ca n be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed 
or unsigned. The person must make the false statement “knowingly and willfully,” which is 
satisfied by showing that the person acted deliberately and with knowledge that the 
representation was false. Concealment by failure to fully disclose required information is also 
a violation. The statement need not be made directly to the government; it can be made to a 
third-party as long as it involves a matter within the jurisdiction of any governmental 
department or agency.  
 
The statement must be material, but there is no requirement that the government suffer an 
actual loss. The materiality of the false statement is judged by the capability of the statement 
to influence government action. 
 



:


feder law prohibit fals claim
there ar a number of feder statut relat to fals claim and statement made to the
feder govern among the most us ar
fals fictiti or fraudul claim 18 us code 287
fals statement 18 us code 1001
conspiraci to defraud the govern 18 us code 286
public sector fraud financi transact
11912 2011 fraud examin manual
the major fraud act 18 us code 1031
obstruct of feder audit 18 us code 1516
these statut ar discuss in greater detail in the law section there ar also a number of
civil remedi discuss in the law section includ the civil fals claim act program
fraud civil remedi and the civil monetari penalti law cmpl
under 18 us code 1001 a fals statement ca n be oral written sworn or unsworn sign
or unsign the person must make the fals statement knowingli and willfulli which is
satisfi by show that the person act deliber and with knowledg that the
represent wa fals conceal by failur to fulli disclos requir inform is also
a violat the statement need not be made directli to the govern it can be made to a
thirdparti as long as it involv a matter within the jurisdict of ani government
depart or agenc
the statement must be materi but there is no requir that the govern suffer an
actual loss the materi of the fals statement is judg by the capabl of the statement
to influenc govern action
