2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Interviewing Government Officials/Legal Counsel


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Legal Counsel 
The higher the official to be interviewed, the more likely he is to be cognizant of his right to 
the presence of counsel and his ability to afford one. High officials are also frequently 
shocked by the fact that they may not be entitled to representation. In fact, government 
employees are more often than not in a position where no right to counsel in an interview 
exists. Simply put, if the official is being interviewed as a witness only (and not as a suspect) 
or if the matter is strictly administrative, or if, although criminal in nature, a decision has 
been made not to prosecute, there is simply no right to the presence of an attorney (or any 
other personal representative).  
 
Miranda warnings, of course, are limited to those situations where the interviewee is “in 
custody or otherwise deprived of his freedom of action in any significant way,” i.e., is in jail, 
under arrest, or in a situation that has all the trappings of a formal arrest. Such situations will 
rarely arise. See Beckwith v. United States, 425 U.S. 341 (1976); Howard v. Office of Personnel 
Management, 86 FMSR 5342 (1986); Ashford v. Bureau of Prisons, supra. 
 
Only where criminal liability is a possibility and the interview is thus voluntary in nature will 
the official be able to insist on the presence of a lawyer as a condition of his cooperation. It 
is important to remember, however, that even though an official may not have the right to 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1930                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel, the decision as to whether or not to allow it is a tactical one and, in a particular case, 
may be the quickest and most efficient means to secure the desired information. 
 



:


legal counsel
the higher the offici to be interview the more like he is to be cogniz of hi right to
the presenc of counsel and hi abil to afford on high offici ar also frequent
shock by the fact that thei mai not be entitl to represent in fact govern
employe ar more often than not in a posit where no right to counsel in an interview
exist simpli put if the offici is be interview as a wit onli and not as a suspect
or if the matter is strictli administr or if although crimin in natur a decis ha
been made not to prosecut there is simpli no right to the presenc of an attornei or ani
other person repres
miranda warn of cours ar limit to those situat where the interviewe is in
custodi or otherwis depriv of hi freedom of action in ani signific wai ie is in jail
under arrest or in a situat that ha all the trap of a formal arrest such situat will
rare aris see beckwith v unit state 425 us 341 1976 howard v offic of personnel
manag 86 fmsr 5342 1986 ashford v bureau of prison supra
onli where crimin liabil is a possibl and the interview is thu voluntari in natur will
the offici be abl to insist on the presenc of a lawyer as a condit of hi cooper it
is import to rememb howev that even though an offici mai not have the right to
public sector fraud financi transact
11930 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel the decis as to whether or not to allow it is a tactic on and in a particular case
mai be the quickest and most effici mean to secur the desir inform
