2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Examining Fraudulent Documents


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Examining Fraudulent Documents 
Forged, altered, fabricated, and other suspicious documents are regularly encountered in 
fraud cases. Most business, legal issues, or financial transactions will produce a substantial 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
amount of paper, including contracts, agreements, wills, order forms, invoices, and 
statements. These documents can be evidence in establishing that a fraud was committed, in 
determining the nature and scope of the fraud, and in identifying the parties responsible. 
  
The fraud examiner is not expected to be a document expert. He should, however, be aware 
of ways to spot phony documents and have knowledge of the capabilities and limitations of 
forensic examinations. In addition, if the fraud examiner suspects that significant documents 
are phony, he should consider consulting with an expert. Expert forensic examinations 
conducted as a part of a fraud investigation can contribute to its success in several ways: 
• Expert examination results can assist in developing and proving the fraud theory: who 
did what and when they did it. 
• Expert examination results can corroborate or refute statements by witnesses or fraud 
suspects. 
• Having the results of expert examinations before interviews can provide significant 
leverage for the examiner during his interviews with fraud suspects, even resulting in 
admissions of guilt from suspects who are confronted with the factual evidence. 
• Forensic handwriting examinations and comparisons can result in the positive 
identification of the writer or signer of a document. Since writing is a conscious act, the 
identification might serve to prove that a particular act is intentional or willful. Proof of 
intent is usually necessary to prosecute a wrongdoer successfully. 
 
 



:


examin fraudul document
forg alter fabric and other suspici document ar regularli encount in
fraud case most busi legal issu or financi transact will produc a substanti
analyz document investig
3104 2011 fraud examin manual
amount of paper includ contract agreement will order form invoic and
statement these document can be evid in establish that a fraud wa commit in
determin the natur and scope of the fraud and in identifi the parti respons
the fraud examin is not expect to be a document expert he should howev be awar
of wai to spot phoni document and have knowledg of the capabl and limit of
forens examin in addit if the fraud examin suspect that signific document
ar phoni he should consid consult with an expert expert forens examin
conduct as a part of a fraud investig can contribut to it success in sever wai
expert examin result can assist in develop and prove the fraud theori who
did what and when thei did it
expert examin result can corrobor or refut statement by wit or fraud
suspect
have the result of expert examin befor interview can provid signific
leverag for the examin dure hi interview with fraud suspect even result in
admiss of guilt from suspect who ar confront with the factual evid
forens handwrit examin and comparison can result in the posit
identif of the writer or signer of a document sinc write is a consciou act the
identif might serv to prove that a particular act is intent or will proof of
intent is usual necessari to prosecut a wrongdoer successfulli
