2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Fraud Examination Methodology/Fraud Theory Approach


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Fraud Theory Approach 
Each fraud examination begins with the proposition that all cases will end in litigation. 
To solve a fraud 
without complete evidence, the examiner must make certain assumptions. This is not unlike 
the scientist who postulates a theory based on observation and then tests it. In the case of 
complex fraud, fraud theory is almost indispensable. Fraud theory begins with the 
assumption, based on the known facts, of what might have occurred. Then that assumption 
is tested to determine whether it is provable. The fraud theory approach involves the 
following steps, in the order of their occurrence: 
• Analyze available data 
• Create a hypothesis 
• Test the hypothesis 
• Refine and amend the hypothesis 
 
A case study on internal fraud that is based on an actual incident, and one that is common in 
the commercial and governmental environment, illustrates the concepts involved in the 
fraud examination process. The names and certain other facts have been changed for 
purposes of illustration. 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-7  
INTRODUCTION 
LINDA REED COLLINS CASE STUDY 
Linda Reed Collins is purchasing manager for Bailey Books Incorporated in St. Augustine, 
Florida. Bailey, with $226 million in annual sales, is one of the country’s leading producers of 
textbooks for the college and university market as well as technical manuals for the medical and 
dental professions. 
 
Bailey’s headquarters consists of 126 employees, plus numerous sales personnel in the field. 
Because of the competitive nature of the textbook business, their profit margins are quite thin. 
Bailey’s purchases average about $75 million annually, consisting mostly of paper stock and 
covering used in the manufacturing process. The great majority of the manufacturing is done in 
Mexico through contracts with the Mexican government. 
 
The purchasing function is principally handled by three purchasing agents. Linda Reed Collins 
is the purchasing manager and has two other buyers who report to her, plus another 18 clerical 
and support personnel. 
 
Because Bailey Books is required by investors and lenders to have audited annual financial 
statements, Bailey employs a large regional CPA firm to conduct its annual audit, and has a 
staff of five internal auditors. All internal fraud matters within the company are referred to 
Loren D. Bridges, a Certified Fraud Examiner. The typical internal frauds at Bailey involve 
defalcations by their cashiers, as well as a constant stream of complaints concerning alleged fraud 
by Bailey Books’ salespeople and distributors. 
 
On January 28, Bridges was referred a telephone call. The male caller advised that he did not 
wish to disclose his identity. However, he claimed to have been a “long-term” supplier to Bailey 
in the area of books and sundries, and magazines.  The caller said that ever since Linda Collins 
took over as purchasing manager for Bailey several years ago, he has been systematically 
“squeezed out” of doing business with Bailey. Although Bridges queried the caller for additional 
information, the person hung up the telephone. 
 
There could be many legitimate reasons why a vendor would feel unfairly treated. To use the 
fraud theory approach, the Certified Fraud Examiner, in this case Bridges, must analyze the 
available data before coming to any preliminary hypothesis as to what has occurred. 
 
I-8     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 



:


fraud theori approach
each fraud examin begin with the proposit that all case will end in litig
to solv a fraud
without complet evid the examin must make certain assumpt thi is not unlik
the scientist who postul a theori base on observ and then test it in the case of
complex fraud fraud theori is almost indispens fraud theori begin with the
assumpt base on the known fact of what might have occur then that assumpt
is test to determin whether it is provabl the fraud theori approach involv the
follow step in the order of their occurr
analyz avail data
creat a hypothesi
test the hypothesi
refin and amend the hypothesi
a case studi on intern fraud that is base on an actual incid and on that is common in
the commerci and government environ illustr the concept involv in the
fraud examin process the name and certain other fact have been chang for
purpos of illustr
2011 fraud examin manual i7
introduct
linda reed collin case studi
linda reed collin is purchas manag for bailei book incorpor in st augustin
florida bailei with 226 million in annual sale is on of the countri lead produc of
textbook for the colleg and univers market as well as technic manual for the medic and
dental profess
bailei headquart consist of 126 employe plu numer sale personnel in the field
becaus of the competit natur of the textbook busi their profit margin ar quit thin
bailei purchas averag about 75 million annual consist mostli of paper stock and
cover us in the manufactur process the great major of the manufactur is done in
mexico through contract with the mexican govern
the purchas function is princip handl by three purchas agent linda reed collin
is the purchas manag and ha two other buyer who report to her plu anoth 18 cleric
and support personnel
becaus bailei book is requir by investor and lender to have audit annual financi
statement bailei emploi a larg region cpa firm to conduct it annual audit and ha a
staff of five intern auditor all intern fraud matter within the compani ar refer to
loren d bridg a certifi fraud examin the typic intern fraud at bailei involv
defalc by their cashier as well as a constant stream of complaint concern alleg fraud
by bailei book salespeopl and distributor
on januari 28 bridg wa refer a telephon call the male caller advis that he did not
wish to disclos hi ident howev he claim to have been a longterm supplier to bailei
in the area of book and sundri and magazin the caller said that ever sinc linda collin
took over as purchas manag for bailei sever year ago he ha been systemat
squeez out of do busi with bailei although bridg queri the caller for addit
inform the person hung up the telephon
there could be mani legitim reason why a vendor would feel unfairli treat to us the
fraud theori approach the certifi fraud examin in thi case bridg must analyz the
avail data befor come to ani preliminari hypothesi as to what ha occur
i8 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
