2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Proof Stages in Fraud Cases/Stage Two: Obtaining Direct Evidence


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Stage Two: Obtaining Direct Evidence 
In many cases cooperation from a co-conspirator or other insider is a necessity, either 
because the case is so complicated that it is otherwise unmanageable, or a key element — such 
as cash payments in a corruption case or the full extent of wrongdoing or intent in a fraud 
case — cannot be proved circumstantially. In some cases, the objective of the circumstantial 
stage is not so much to obtain evidence to convict the ultimate defendant, but rather to 
identify and turn an inside witness. 
  
Ideally, the least culpable witness should be approached first. In a corruption case, this might 
be the “bag man,” a subordinate. Or, if the only choice is the payer or taker, usually the 
payer is the better choice. A jury will react negatively if its members believe that the witness 
is more culpable than the defendant. A decision must also be made about how to convince 
the witness to assist. Ideally, to preserve the witness’ credibility, the fewer concessions the 
better. Remember that immunity might be given only with the consent of the court.  
  
Remember, too, that even the most self-incriminating testimony of a co-conspirator must be 
corroborated. Testimony from the insider should mesh with and augment the circumstantial 
evidence, not replace it. The credibility of a turned witness can become  the central issue in 
the case and distract the jury from the strength of the circumstantial evidence. If 
nonessential testimony from a co-conspirator cannot be corroborated, don’t use it. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-17  
INTRODUCTION 
I-18     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
Be aware that cooperating, culpable witnesses in a white-collar case often minimize their role 
to avoid embarrassment, even if protected from legal consequences, and are prone to 
describe themselves more as observers than participants. This is very damaging to credibility, 
and must be overcome before such witnesses can be perceived as believable. 
 



:


stage two obtain direct evid
in mani case cooper from a coconspir or other insid is a necess either
becaus the case is so complic that it is otherwis unmanag or a kei element such
as cash payment in a corrupt case or the full extent of wrongdo or intent in a fraud
case cannot be prove circumstanti in some case the object of the circumstanti
stage is not so much to obtain evid to convict the ultim defend but rather to
identifi and turn an insid wit
ideal the least culpabl wit should be approach first in a corrupt case thi might
be the bag man a subordin or if the onli choic is the payer or taker usual the
payer is the better choic a juri will react neg if it member believ that the wit
is more culpabl than the defend a decis must also be made about how to convinc
the wit to assist ideal to preserv the wit credibl the fewer concess the
better rememb that immun might be given onli with the consent of the court
rememb too that even the most selfincrimin testimoni of a coconspir must be
corrobor testimoni from the insid should mesh with and augment the circumstanti
evid not replac it the credibl of a turn wit can becom the central issu in
the case and distract the juri from the strength of the circumstanti evid if
nonessenti testimoni from a coconspir cannot be corrobor dont us it
2011 fraud examin manual i17
introduct
i18 2011 fraud examin manual
be awar that cooper culpabl wit in a whitecollar case often minim their role
to avoid embarrass even if protect from legal consequ and ar prone to
describ themselv more as observ than particip thi is veri damag to credibl
and must be overcom befor such wit can be perceiv as believ
