2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS 
 
Interviewing witnesses to obtain financial data involves the systematic questioning of people 
who have knowledge of the events, the people involved, and the physical evidence 
surrounding the case. Financial interviewing is not unlike other kinds of interviewing. But in 
financial interviews, evidence often develops in bits and pieces that, when viewed separately, 
might appear to lead nowhere. Frustration is common, and tactics and techniques might 
have to be modified. Diligence, patience, and persistence are essential for successful results.  
 
 
Comprehensive Guidelines for Information to Be Collected in Financial Interviews 
The following is a checklist of general information that can be covered in the financial 
interview. 
 
Identification 
• Full name 
• Alias 
• Reason for alias 
 
Birth 
• Date and place of birth 
• Citizenship 
• Father’s name; living? (If deceased, when?) 
• Mother’s name; living? (If deceased, when?) 
 
Address During Pertinent Years 
• Resident address; phone number 
• Business address; phone number 
• Other present or prior address(es) 
• Marital status; if married, date and place of marriage 
• If divorced, when and where 
• Spouse’s maiden name 
• Spouse’s parents; living? (If deceased, when?) 
• Children’s names and ages; other dependents 
 
  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.802   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Occupation 
• Present occupation 
• Company name and address 
• Present salary 
• Length of time employed 
• Additional employment 
• Prior occupations 
• Spouse’s occupation 
 
General Background 
• Physical health 
• Mental health 
• Education 
• Professional qualifications 
• Military service 
• Passport, Social Security, and/or social insurance numbers (for identification purposes) 
• Ever been investigated for financial crimes? 
• Ever been arrested? 
• Ever filed bankruptcy? If so, who acted as receiver/trustee? 
• Hobbies and interests 
 
Financial Institutions (Business and Personal) 
• Financial institution accounts 
• Safe deposit boxes (request inventory); in whose name; contents; does anyone else  
have access? 
• Credit cards 
• Trusts; beneficiary, donor, or trustee 
• Mutual funds or other securities owned 
• Brokers; currency exchanges used 
• Life insurance 
• Indirect dealings (e.g., through lawyers or accountants) 
• Cashier’s checks 
• Money orders, bank drafts, traveler’s checks 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.803 
Sources of Income 
• Salaries, wages, business receipts 
• Interest and dividends 
• Sale of securities 
• Rents and royalties 
• Pensions, trusts, annuities, etc. 
• Gifts (money, property, etc.) 
• Inheritances 
• Loans 
• Mortgages 
• Sales of assets 
• Municipal bond interest 
• Insurance settlements 
• Damages from legal actions 
• Any other source of funds, ever 
 
Net Income and Expenditures 
• Current cash on hand, including cash in safe deposit boxes, but not cash in bank 
accounts 
• Location of current cash 
• Largest amount of cash ever on hand; location 
• End-of-year cash 
• Notes receivable 
• Mortgages receivable 
• Life insurance policies 
• Automobiles 
• Real estate 
• Stocks, bonds, and other securities 
• Jewelry, furs 
• Airplanes, boats 
• Any other assets valued 
 
Liabilities 
• Payables 
• Loans 
• Assets purchased by financing 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.804   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Mortgages 
• Bonds 
 
Expenditures 
• Debt reduction 
• Insurance premiums 
• Interest expense 
• Contributions 
• Medical 
• Travel 
• Real estate and other taxes 
• Household wages (e.g., babysitter, housekeeper, gardener) 
• Casualty losses 
 
Business Operations 
• Name and address 
• Date organized and nature (corporation, partnership) 
• Company or business registration numbers 
• Tax identification numbers 
• Title and duties 
• Reporting arrangements—to and from whom? 
• Banking and cash handling arrangements 
• Investment; where and when 
• Subsidiaries and associates 
• Key people 
 
Books and Records 
• Nature of accounting system (e.g., cash, accrual) 
• Period covered 
• Location 
• Name of person maintaining and controlling 
• Types (journal, ledgers, minute books, canceled checks, bank statements, invoices, cash) 
• External auditors 
 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.805 
Business Receipts 
• Form (electronic, check, or cash) 
• Are all receipts deposited? Where? 
• Are business receipts segregated from personal ones? 
• Are expenses ever paid with undeposited receipts? 
• Arrangements for foreign currency payments 
• Trade finance arrangements, letters of credit, etc. 
 
 
Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions 
A subject’s income can be established by the direct or indirect approach. The direct 
approach, or the specific-items method of proving income, relies on specific transactions, 
such as sales or expenses, to determine income. The indirect approach relies on 
circumstantial proof of income. Indirect methods will be discussed in the next section. 
 
To trace financial transactions using the direct method, the examiner must obtain relevant 
financial records. 
 
Financial Institutions 
Fraud examiners should recognize that in most instances bank records are not readily 
obtainable. Substantial requirements usually must be met to justify legal process (e.g., 
subpoena, search warrant, and the like), which banks will customarily demand as a condition 
for disclosure. Preliminary investigation is of the utmost importance to lay the basis for 
obtaining such records. More information on banking transactions is contained in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
The availability of investigative avenues often determines whether a promising fraud 
examination will grind to a halt or proceed successfully. Legal advice from a prosecutor or 
civil counsel should be sought in all such instances. It should also be recognized that bank 
officials and employees can be questioned by fraud examiners in the same manner as any 
other potential witnesses and that their responses to proper inquiries might provide 
important information. 
 
Bank records are perhaps the single most important financial source available to a fraud 
examiner. In addition to their use as evidence for fraud, a bank’s records might provide leads 
on sources of funds, expenditures, and personal affairs. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following information can be of value to fraud examiners seeking information from 
banks concerning pertinent financial transactions of economic crime perpetrators. It is based 
in part on the operational guidelines issued by the American Bankers Association to all 
member banks in the United States and on the training guides issued by the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury. 
 
Types of Financial Institutions  
Banks are classified primarily by their major services. 
• Commercial banks  offer businesses and individuals such services as checking accounts, 
loans, and exchange instruments. 
• Savings banks  and savings and loan associations  handle savings accounts and mortgage loans. 
• Trust companies  handle property for others under various types of fiduciary 
accommodations. 
 
Many banks combine all three services. Banks are organized under either state or national 
banking laws. 
 
The basic bank functions are as follows: 
• Receive deposits 
• Pay checks 
• Transfer funds 
• Make loans 
• Collect sundry financial instruments 
• Hold and administer property for others 
• Perform other services, such as renting safe deposit boxes 
 
Internal Bookkeeping Procedures 
The internal record-keeping practices and procedures of banks not only are complex but 
they constantly are changing because of the growing sophistication of computer technology. 
Banks are moving steadily toward an electronic funds-transfer system that will eliminate the 
use of checks. Such a system will automatically transfer money from the account of the 
purchaser to the account of the seller. Paper trails will disappear. Detailed familiarity with the 
intricacies of internal bank operations is not essential, however, for the fraud examiner to 
obtain the types of information necessary for investigations. What is essential is the 
knowledge that records of customers’ transactions are maintained and retained. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.807 
Electronic Banking 
Electronic banking is possibly the most common form of banking today. Electronic banking 
includes automated teller machine transactions; point-of-sale transactions using credit or 
debit cards; smart cards, which are gaining popularity in the U.S. (and are already popular in 
Europe); wire transfers; online bill payment through Internet banking and biller websites; 
and traditional automated clearing house (ACH) applications of direct payment and direct 
deposit. 
 
All of these forms of electronic banking are governed by the Electronic Fund Transfer Act 
(EFTA) (15, U.S.C., § 1693 (See Appendix A)). The EFTA currently requires financial 
institutions to keep records on all transactions of $3,000 or more. 
 
Retention of Records 
The Bank Secrecy Act set forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements 
designed to help track large or unusual financial transactions. The Act consists of two titles. 
Title I contains provisions requiring financial institutions and securities brokers and dealers 
to keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of their customers. Title II of the 
Act (originally entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act) requires banks, 
“financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities brokers and dealers, currency 
exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to report certain transactions to the 
government.  
 
Title I—Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. The recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. Under these regulations, all institutions are required to keep a record of any 
financial transaction of more than $10,000. 
 
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep an original, microfilm, or other 
copy or reproduction of most demand deposits (checking account) and savings account 
records must be retained for five years. The records must include signature cards; 
statements, ledger cards or other records disclosing all transactions, that is, deposits and 
withdrawals; and copies of customers’ check s, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks drawn on the bank or issued and payable by it. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.808   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a 
customer’s checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit 
tickets. They must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check 
deposited to a customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply to checks written or deposits made in excess of 
$100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all pertinent records, including the checks and 
deposits in amounts less than $100, rather than sort their records into two categories. The 
Bank Secrecy Act also requires financial institutions to retain a record of any extension of 
credit of more than $10,000 as well as each tr ansfer of $10,000 or more outside the United 
States. 
 
Title II—Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Title II of the Bank Secrecy Act is codified as 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5330. The purpose of 
these sections is to require certain reports or records to be filed or kept by “financial 
institutions.” Section 5312(a)(2) defines “financial institution” very broadly to include not 
only banks, but also securities brokers; curre ncy exchange houses; insurance companies; loan 
companies; travel agencies; telegraph companie s; issuers or cashiers of checks or money 
orders; auto, boat, and airplane dealers; casinos; and persons involved in real estate closings 
and settlements. Only recently has the Treasury Department begun to reign in much of the 
non-financial institution transaction business in the by requiring registration of these diverse 
enterprises. 
 
Gaining Access to Records Held by Financial Institutions 
One of the most difficult challenges to the fraud examiner will be to gain access to the 
records held by financial institutions. Although bank records are one of the most important 
sources available to fraud examinations, they are not readily obtainable. Most suspects will 
not willingly give their records to a fraud examiner, especially if the records contain 
potentially incriminating evidence.  
 
Moreover, financial institutions’ authority to di sclose bank records is restricted by federal 
and state law. For example, the Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions 
from disclosing financial information about individual customers until the governmental 
authority obtains the customer’s consent, a court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or 
some other formal demand, with limited exceptions. And even though Right to Financial 
Privacy Act applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and other 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.809 
financial institutions also will not release such information to private parties absent legal 
process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
As a result, substantial requirements must generally be met before banks will disclose such 
information. In general, bank records can be obtained in most jurisdictions by using one of 
the following methods: 
• Civil discovery 
• Administrative subpoena or summons 
• Civil summons 
• Customer authorized disclosure 
• Court subpoena 
• Grand jury subpoena 
• Search warrant  
 
Furthermore, the cost of obtaining bank records can be quite high. Banks generally charge 
both public and private entities to search and retrieve records. There are usually additional 
costs for the reproduction of records. It might be prudent for the examiner to limit record 
requests as much as possible.  
 
Despite such complications, the examiner might attempt to obtain the financial records of 
suspects by contacting their former spouses. Former spouses might have banking records 
useful to the fraud examiner that they may be happy to turn over. Similarly, the banking 
records might also be a part of a divorce settlement or a lawsuit. 
 
Types of Financial Records 
The financial records identified and discussed below are limited to those of particular 
interest to fraud examiners. 
 
Account Opening Documents 
Account opening documents include the records required to create a bank account, but the 
types of files required may vary depending on the type of account. 
 
PERSONAL ACCOUNTS 
Signature cards are the key records required to open and use a personal account. The 
signature card is the evidence of a contract between the customer and bank. When a 
depositor opens an account, the bank requires that a signature card be signed. By signing the 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.810   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
card, the depositor becomes a party to a contract with the bank under which he accepts all 
rules and regulations of the bank and authorizes the bank to honor his orders for 
withdrawing funds. For a corporation or a partnership account, the signature card is 
accompanied by copies of resolutions of the board of directors or partnership agreements 
naming the person authorized to draw checks on the accounts. 
 
The signature card is a source of valuable information. Although its form varies, the card 
usually contains such data as banking connections and the date and amount of the initial 
deposit. The initial deposit traced through the bank’s records may disclose a source of 
income. The identification of the person who opened the account might be significant, 
especially if the depositor used an alias. 
 
Many banks investigate the references give n by a new customer. They might also make 
inquiries of various credit reporting agencies. This information is contained in a 
correspondence file or a credit file that can contain comments of the person who opened the 
account and might show information given by the depositor when opening the account. 
 
In banks using Automatic Data Processing (ADP), the signature card also contains an 
account number assigned to the customer. In tracing information about a subject’s 
transactions with the bank, the account number must be used. If it does not appear on the 
signature card, it can be located in the bank’s cross-reference file. Assigned account numbers 
are encoded on other documents relating to the depositor by means of a system called 
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR). The card also might contain the depositor’s 
Social Security number. 
 
The signature card might define the account as either a regular or a special checking account. 
The main difference between the two is the service charge made by the bank. The regular 
checking account is used mostly by businesses and individuals who maintain large average 
balances. The special checking account is used by individuals who usually have small  
account balances. 
 
When requesting the signature card, the fraud examiner should determine whether the bank 
maintains any type of central file. Most large banks have a central file that lists all 
departments with which a customer has had dealings. If the bank has such a file, the 
examiner does not need to check with each department to obtain information. The subject 
might at one time have had a bank account that later was closed. Requests for information 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.811 
from a bank about a subject should always include a reference to both active and closed 
accounts. Records of closed accounts are usually maintained in a separate file. 
 
In addition to a signature card, the account-opening file for a personal account might 
contain a copy of some form of identification (e.g., driver’s license) the account holder 
provided the bank. 
 
BUSINESS ACCOUNTS 
In addition to the documentation required for opening a personal account, the opening 
documents for a corporate account will include a copy of the corporate resolution 
authorizing the opening of a bank account and possibly the company’s articles of 
incorporation. These documents should indicate who the company’s corporate officers are 
and its date of incorporation.  
 
For an unincorporated company to open a bank account, the baking institution might 
require the company to provide a doing business as (DBA) registration, fictitious name 
registration, or business registration certificate. Generally, the required documentation 
depends on the applicable state laws. 
 
Negotiated Checks 
Canceled checks written by a subject or received from others provide the fraud examiner 
with much more than amounts, payees, and endorsees. Of particular interest are checks that 
have been cashed. All banks use a series of codes or symbols imprinted on the front of a 
check to show that the check has been cashed. The specific codes used in various areas can 
be obtained locally. 
 
A useful technique to help examine negotiated checks is to list the information from the 
checks on a spreadsheet (either manual or electronic). Checks should be listed by number 
and date on the left with the payee, amount, and purpose of the check, if known, to the 
right. This will show the subject’s routine monthly or annual expenditures that can be useful 
for computing the comparative net worth. The absence of a check for a recurring payment 
for a particular month might indicate a cash payment, which in turn would indicate possible 
undisclosed cash income. Examine the backs of checks payable to cash and note where they 
were cashed. The depository stamp can identify the bank at which the check was cashed. 
This information may provide a lead to another bank account. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.812   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECK 21 
“With image exchange, and the emerging fraud detection technology, banks will be able to 
know if sufficient funds are in the account … whether the customer is who he claims to be 
… and whether the check is legitimate.” 6 
 
In July 2003, Congress issued final regulations regarding the availability of funds and 
collection of checks. These regulations, known as “Check 21,” created “substitute checks,” a 
type of negotiable instrument that became the legal equivalent of paper checks. This 
provision facilitates the efficient collection and return of checks in electronic form by 
alleviating the collection requirement that depository banks actually send the original paper 
checks to collecting banks for payment.  
 
Under Check 21, a depository bank can transfer check information electronically to a 
collecting bank via a substitute check for presentment. The collecting bank is then required 
to take presentment of the substitute check as long as it meets all the legal requirements of 
the original check. Therefore, rather than actually processing and sending an original  
paper check across cities and states, the depositing bank can now collect the substitute  
check electronically. 
 
A substitute check is a paper reproduction of the original check that states, “This is a legal 
copy of your check. You can use it the same  way you would use the original check.” Upon 
transfer, presentment, or return, a bank warrants that the substitute check submitted is an 
accurate depiction of the physical check, and that no depository bank, drawee, drawer, or 
endorser will be asked or required to pay a check that has already been paid. Essentially, this 
legend on the substitute check informs consumers of their rights to expedited recrediting of 
an amount charged if there is a disputed item and the original or substituted copy is 
necessary to prove the validity of the charge on the account. Under this law, the validity of a 
charge becomes an issue when a consumer is charged twice for a check, the substitute check 
is illegible, or the original check was not properly copied during the imaging process. 
 
Furthermore, Check 21 places the risk of loss associated with substitute checks on the 
reconverting bank that first transferred, presented, or returned the substitute check. 
                                                 
6 Robertson, Bill and Ken Gahre. White-Collar Crime Fighter. Vol. 6, No. 1, Check 21: Blackjack for Check Fraud 
Fighters?   Ridgefield, CT: White Collar Crime101, LLC., 2004. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.813 
Although the reconverting banks can allocate such loss among themselves, they may remain 
liable under warranty claim, indemnity, or recrediting claims. 
 
TRACING CHECKS 
Tracing checks is facilitated by the use of bank identification symbols. Fraud examiners do 
not have to understand the internal bookkeeping procedures used by banks. The concept of 
bank identification symbols, however, is of interest. All checks printed for banking 
institutions contain an ABA transit number. These numbers represent an identification code 
developed by the American Bankers Association. The ABA transit number enables a check 
to be routed to the bank of origin. In the process of routing, a trail is left. 
 
MAGNETIC INK CHARACTER RECOGNITION 
Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) is a machine language and is a check design 
standard to which all banks must conform. Numeric information is printed in magnetic ink 
on the bottom of bank checks and other documents. This coding is electronically scanned by 
computers that convert the magnetic ink notations into electronic impulses readable by a 
computer. MICR information is printed in groupings called fields. The first field on the left 
on bank checks is the Federal Reserve check routing code and the next is the ABA transit 
number. These numbers also appear in the upper right corner of the check. 
 
The account number field shows the drawer’s assigned account number at the bank. When 
the check is processed through the bank, an additional field is added on the right for the 
amount of the check. The dollar amount of the check should always equal the encoded 
MICR amount. These two figures should be compared to make sure that the subject did not 
alter the returned check. All checks, drafts, and similar items that are not encoded with 
magnetic ink cannot be cleared through the Federal Reserve system without special handling. 
 
PREFIX NUMBERS OF CITIES IN NUMERICAL ORDER 
When the ABA established the city and state prefix numbering system, it did so by the 
geographical location of the reserve cities in existence at the time. The prefix numbers 
identify city and state documents. For example, numbers 1 through 49, as seen in the 
following examples, were given to the most populated reserve cities and major banking 
centers at the time. The rest of the numbers, 50 through 99, were assigned to the states from 
East to West. The principal numbers 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 were given to the main collecting 
financial centers (New York, Pennsylvania, Illi nois, Missouri and California). The numbers 
before and after each principal number were generally designated to nearby states. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.814   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PREFIX NUMBERS OF CITIES AND STATES  
1–49   Reserve Cities 
50–99  States 
50–58  Eastern States 
59  Alaska, American Samoa, Guam, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands 
60–69  Southeastern States  
70–79  Central States 
80–88  Southwestern States 
90–99  Western States  
 
RESERVE CITY, MAJOR BANKING CENTER, AND STATE PREFIX NUMBERS  
  1 New York, NY 34 Tacoma, WA 68 Virginia 
  2 Chicago, IL 35 Houston, TX 69 West Virginia 
  3 Philadelphia, PA 36 St. Joseph, MO 70 Illinois 
  4 St. Louis, MO 37 Fort Worth, TX 71 Indiana 
  5 Boston, MA 38 Savannah, GA 72 Iowa 
  6 Cleveland, OH 39 Oklahoma City, OK 73 Kentucky 
  7 Baltimore, MD 40 Wichita, KS 74 Michigan 
  8 Pittsburgh, PA 41 Sioux City, IA 75 Minnesota 
  9 Detroit, MI 43 Lincoln, NE 76 Nebraska 
10 Buffalo, NY 44 Topeka, KS 77 North Dakota  
11 San Francisco, CA 45 Dubuque, IA 78 South Dakota 
12 Milwaukee, WI 46 Galveston, TX 79 Wisconsin 
13 Cincinnati, OH  47 Cedar Rapids, IA 80 Missouri 
14 New Orleans, LA 48 Waco, TX 81 Arkansas 
15 Washington, D.C. 49 Muskogee, OK 82 Colorado  
16 Los Angeles, CA 50 New York 83 Kansas 
17 Minneapolis, MN 51 Connecticut 84 Louisiana  
18 Kansas City, MO 52 Maine 85 Mississippi 
19 Seattle, WA 53 Massachusetts 86 Oklahoma 
20 Indianapolis, IN 54 New Hampshire 87 Tennessee 
21 Louisville, KY 55 New Jersey 88 Texas 
22 St. Paul, MN 56 Ohio 89 --- 
23 Denver, CO 57 Rhode Island 90 California 
24 Portland, OR 58 Vermont 91 Arizona 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.815 
25 Columbus, OH 59 AL, AS, GU, HI, PR, VI 7 92 Idaho 
26 Memphis, TN 60 Pennsylvania 93 Montana 
27 Omaha, NE 61 Alabama 94 Nevada 
28 Spokane, WA 62 Delaware 95 New Mexico 
29 Albany, NY 63 Florida 96 Oregon 
30 San Antonio, TX 64 Georgia 97 Utah 
31 Salt Lake City, UT 65 Maryland 98 Washington 
32 Dallas, TX 66 North Carolina 99 Wyoming 
 
All banks in an area served by a Federal Reserve bank or branch carry the routing symbol of 
the Federal Reserve bank or branch. The Federal Reserve routing symbol (FRRS) 
encompasses the first four digits of the nine-digit routing number. This routing symbol 
identifies where the Federal Reserve bank is located. The first two numbers of the FRRS 
designate the Federal Reserve District in which the bank is located (as shown below). The 12 
Federal Reserve Districts and numbers are as follows:  
 
01—Boston, MA 
02—New York, NY 
03—Philadelphia, PA 
04—Cleveland, OH 
05—Richmond, VA 
06—Atlanta, GA 
07—Chicago, IL 
08—St. Louis, MO 
09—Minneapolis, MN 
10—Kansas City, KS 
11—Dallas, TX 
12—San Francisco, CA 
 
The next two numbers designate the specific bank location of the Federal Reserve branch. A 
thrift institution is designated when “2” is added to the first digit of the FRRS. For example, 
if there is a thrift institution in the first district (Boston) the designation would be “21.” If 
the thrift institution is in a district that has a double digit, such as San Francisco, the 
designation becomes “32.” The next four numbers of the routing number sequence are 
                                                 
7 AL: Alaska; AS: American Samoa; GU: Guam; HI: Hawaii; PR: Puerto Rico; VI: Virgin Islands 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.816   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
always unique to the financial institution; and the last number of the nine digit routing 
number is a digit derived from an algorithmic calculation. 
 
Deposit Tickets 
The deposit ticket is the principal source document for crediting the customer’s account. 
Deposits are first recorded on the deposit ticket or slip that usually segregates currency, 
coins, and checks. The checks are listed separately. In many localities the depositor writes 
the ABA number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket. Either of 
these might help to identify the source of the check. In other localities the bank writes the 
ABA number on the deposit ticket, and in some banks no identifying data is entered on the 
deposit ticket. Regardless of the detail contained on a deposit ticket, bank record-keeping 
systems allow deposits to be identified and traced to their sources.  
 
In working with deposit tickets, the fraud examiner must remember that sometimes the 
depositor splits the deposit, meaning only part of the check is actually deposited. In these 
instances, the customer either receives cash or requests that part of the proceeds be applied 
to a note or interest due to the bank. In some instances, it might be important to determine 
the total amount of cash and checks presented for deposit before deductions. When this is 
the case, the fraud examiner should inquire from the bank how split deposits are handled. 
 
Deposit items can be broken down into two types: on-us items and clearinghouse items. 
 
ON-US ITEMS 
An on-us item  is a check or draft that is presented for payment where the depository bank is 
also the payor bank. For example, a check written by a customer of one bank is deposited by 
the payee at another branch of the same bank. The bank should be able to trace the source 
of any on-us items. The source might be loan proceeds, certificates of deposit, wire transfers, 
bank checks, or checks from other deposits at that bank. If the deposit is the proceeds from 
a loan, obtain and analyze the loan file (examination of the loan file is discussed later in this 
chapter). If the deposit came from a wire transfer, trace the wire transfer to the originating 
bank to see where the funds for the wire transfer originated. This search could lead to other 
accounts, other witnesses, co-conspirators, or offshore transactions. 
 
Bank checks (such as cashier’s checks and money orders) could be an indication of smurfing 
operations. Smurfing  is the process by which a subject structures a deposit into several 
transactions, each less than $10,000, to avoid filing a currency transaction report as required 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.817 
under the Bank Secrecy Act. As the video portion of this course makes clear, smurfing is a 
very common technique for avoiding reporting requirements. Look for large numbers of 
cashier’s checks in even amounts deposited on a regular basis.  
 
CLEARINGHOUSE ITEMS 
Clearinghouse items  are those that must clear through other local banks and are therefore sent 
to a local clearinghouse for processing, and they include those items that are sent to out-of-
 town banks, such as Federal Reserve Banks. Because tracking down these items will involve 
obtaining records from third-party banks, the tracing process might be more time 
consuming and will probably require legal process. 
 
To determine whether an item is an on-us item or a clearinghouse item, first look to see 
whether the bank on which the check was drawn is the same as the bank in which it was 
deposited. If the names are not the same, check the endorsements on the back of the check. 
If the item has a different bank’s endorsement or  a Federal Reserve bank’s endorsement, it is 
a clearinghouse item. The endorsement should contain the name of the processing bank or 
its transit number. 
 
Wire Transfers 
A wire transfer  is a method of transferring money from one bank to another. These transfers 
are processed by banks and by wire remittance companies such as Western Union and 
MoneyGram.  
 
Like other transactions, banks keep records of wire transfers. The records will identify who 
sent the wire, where it was sent, the date, and the amount. If the transfer was to a bank in 
the United States, the bank should have a record of the account number of the account into 
which the funds were deposited. If the wire was sent offshore, however, tracing the transfer 
depends on the laws and policies of the country and the receiving institution. 
 
Intrabank Transfers 
Other departments within a bank can credit the depositor’s account for funds collected, such 
as the proceeds of loans or items held by the bank for collection. Items held by the bank for 
collection are not always deposited to the customer’s account but are sometimes remitted 
directly to the customer. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.818   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Savings Accounts 
These are referred to as time deposits  because sometimes they are not as readily available to the 
customer as deposits to a checking account. Funds in a savings account might be subject to a 
30-day notice of withdrawal. 
 
Certificates of Deposit 
Certificates of deposit  (CDs) are interest bearing investment products that provide limited access 
to the money invested and a modest rate of interest. CDs are intended to be held until 
maturity, at which time the money may be withdrawn together with the accrued interest. 
Many banks impose penalties on money with drawn from a CD before maturity.  
 
Bank Statements 
A bank statement is a summary of all the transactions of a bank account. Bank statements 
are provided for all types of bank accounts, including checking accounts, money market 
accounts, savings accounts, CAP accounts (used by those who often deal in securities 
transactions), and others. 
 
Bank statements are helpful because they contain important information. In general, the 
details on a bank statement include the name and address of the bank, the name and address 
of the account holder, the account number, the opening balance, a record of all debit 
transactions (e.g., cash withdrawals from a teller, automated-teller machine (ATM) cash 
withdrawals, ATM payments, check payments, online payments, debit card payments, bank 
fees, etc.), a record of all credit transactions (e.g., direct transfers, cash deposits, check 
deposits, etc.), and the closing balance.  
 
Bank statements summarize the financial activity of the account holder for a specific period 
(usually a month). If a credit card is tied to the account, the bank statement also reflects 
credit card balances but usually not specific transactions.  
 
Today, bank statements are mailed to account holders or are accessible online. Some banks 
still return original checks along with the bank statements to the account holder; others 
provide pages with smaller facsimiles of the front and back of each check. 
 
Generally, bank statements contain a wealth of information. In most bank statements, 
financial activity in the account is shown along with a tied credit card balance. Typically, 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.819 
bank statements show numerous types of transactions, including checks, electronic checks, 
and electronic fund transfers, as they are charged against the account. 
 
Other Exchange Instruments 
Exchange instruments are vehicles by which the bank transfers funds, and these instruments 
include cashier’s checks, bank drafts, traveler ’s checks, bank money orders, and certified 
checks. Bank exchange instruments are often purchased with currency; therefore, they may 
be good sources of information about a subject’s currency transactions. 
 
CASHIER’S CHECKS 
Cashier’s checks  are issued and certified by a bank with itself as the drawer. These items are 
called treasurer’s checks when issued by a trust company. They are frequently an excellent 
lead to other bank accounts, stock, real property, and other assets. Because cashier’s checks 
can be held indefinitely, subjects sometimes purchase cashier’s checks instead of keeping 
large amounts of currency on hand. In reconstructing a subject’s transactions with cashier’s 
checks, be sure that all checks are accounted for because subjects sometimes exchange 
previously purchased checks for new ones.  
 
Bank checks, such as cashier’s checks, can be extremely time consuming and expensive to 
locate unless you know the date and number of the check. However, if the subject has 
deposited a bank check into his account, or purchased a bank check using a check from his 
account, then copies of bank checks are much easier to obtain because the subject’s account 
records will reveal the date and number of the bank check. 
 
BANK DRAFTS 
Bank drafts are checks drawn by the issuing bank on its account with another bank. Often 
this other account is in the geographical area where the purchaser desires to make a 
payment. Bank drafts also can be used when a subject does not want to carry a large amount 
of cash. 
 
TRAVELER’S CHECKS 
Traveler’s checks are checks issued in predetermined amounts by the American Express 
Company and several large U.S. banks. Local banks purchase them from issuing companies 
of U.S. banks and then sell them to the public. Traveler’s checks require two signatures of 
the purchaser: one when purchased and the other when cashed. Traveler’s checks are traced 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
by their serial number. The issuing company usually keeps records of traveler’s checks sent 
to it by the selling bank. Traveler’s checks do not expire. 
 
The local bank that sold the checks might keep a copy of the sales order that lists the serial 
numbers. If the numbers are not available, the issuing bank might be able to supply the 
information if it is known when the checks were purchased. Canceled checks can be 
obtained from the American Express Company or from other issuing banks. A target can 
purchase large amounts of traveler’s checks from one bank and place them in another to 
avoid arousing suspicion by depositing cash. 
 
It is important to note, however, that traveler’s checks are declining in use. According to the 
Federal Reserve, usage of traveler’s checks has declined each year since their peak in the mid 
1990s.  
 
BANK MONEY ORDERS 
Bank money orders are similar to cashier’s checks but usually are for small amounts. Like 
cashier’s checks, money orders may be resorted to by subjects reluctant to use cash. 
 
CERTIFIED CHECKS 
Certified checks  are customer’s checks stamped with the paying bank’s guarantee that the 
maker’s signature is genuine and that there is enough money available in the holder’s account  
to cover the amount to be paid.  Certified checks are liabilities of the bank and, when paid, 
are kept by the bank. These checks are immediately charged against the customer’s account 
by debit memorandums. Some banks permit customers to retrieve the original checks by 
surrendering the debit memorandum.  
 
Loan Records 
Loan records can provide important information regarding a subject. With loan records, the 
collateral that secures them, and the results of (bank) credit investigations, a bank has a 
wealth of information. When a bank makes a commercial loan to an individual, it requires 
detailed statements of assets and liabilities from the borrower. The loan file also might 
include the results of credit inquiries regarding paying habits, loan amounts, and present 
unpaid balances. A bank credit department generally maintains the following basic records: 
• The credit or loan file: This file includes the loan application, financial statement, and 
general economic history of the customer. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.821 
• The liability ledger : This contains the customer’s past and present liability to the bank. 
These sheets also contain information such as the loan date, note number, amount of the 
loan, interest rate, due date, and payments. 
• The collateral file: A complete description of the items pledged as security for loans. 
Records of such collateral can provide valuable information about a subject’s assets. 
 
Indications of unusual loans include loans in odd amounts or loans that were not deposited 
into the subject’s bank account. Loans that show unusual repayments also should be traced. 
Lump-sum payments and odd-amount payments are unusual. Accelerated payments or large 
pay-downs on the balance might indicate sudden wealth. 
 
Loan records also might reveal collusion between  the bank and the subject. For instance, if 
the records show that a loan repayment is long overdue or the loan has an extended rollover, 
collusion might exist. Also, loans made in contravention to the bank’s normal loan or a loan 
that appears to be in excess of the individual’s ability to repay suggests a “special 
relationship” between the bank and the subject. 
 
Loan proceeds might be deposited into hidden accounts, or hidden accounts might be used 
for loan payments. Loans might be secured by hidden assets or cosigned by previously 
unknown cohorts. Alternatively, the subject might have taken out the loan for someone else. 
Tracing the ultimate disposition of the proceeds will uncover those leads. 
 
Tracing the disposition of loan proceeds is similar to tracing deposit transactions. The 
proceeds could have been deposited within the bank into the subject’s account or someone 
else’s account, or they might be used to purchase a certificate of deposit. The funds might 
have been sent to the wire transfer department for transmittal to another bank. More 
commonly, the proceeds will be given to the customer in the form of a bank check. The 
bank should be able to trace the check to determine where it was deposited or cashed. The 
loan proceeds might have been used to finance an asset, the down payment for which came 
from illegal funds. Tracing the source of loan payments will provide some leads; for instance, 
the payments might be made from a previously unknown account. Payments made by a 
third-party might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme. 
 
The loan application should contain a financial statement, or its equivalent, on which the 
subject may identify other accounts and assets. The file might also contain tax returns, credit 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.822   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency reports, and notes of interviews by the loan officer. The security for the loan, if any, 
might be a hidden asset. 
 
MORTGAGE LOAN FILES 
Mortgage loan files often contain the most detailed financial statements submitted by the 
subject. The loan file should identify the title company that handled the closing, the 
homeowner’s insurance carrier, the closing attorney, and perhaps the real estate broker. The 
title company files often contain copies of the cashier’s checks used for the down payment, 
which can identify new accounts. 
 
The homeowner’s insurance policy might contain a rider that lists the homeowner’s valuable 
assets, such as jewelry or furs, perhaps with appraisals and purchase receipts. The closing 
attorney will have many of the same materials found in the title company files. The real 
estate broker might keep copies of personal checks used for deposits and provide 
information about other real estate transactions by the subjects. Don’t forget to look for 
accelerated or lump sum payments on the mortgage balance. 
 
CHECK CREDIT LOANS 
Check credit is another loan service that more and more banks are offering. Under a check 
credit plan, the bank agrees to extend credit to a customer up to a maximum amount. If the 
amount of the check is not in the customer’s a ccount, the resulting overdraft is set up as a 
loan. The bank then bills the customer for the loan. Another plan is a specialized checking 
account that is used only up to a predetermined amount under a loan agreement; the 
outstanding balance is treated as an installment loan by the bank. Copies of loan agreements 
and statements under both plans can be obtained from the bank files. 
 
Credit Card Records 
Banks are increasingly doing business in credit cards. Under bank credit card plans, the 
cardholder can charge purchases at stores, restaurants, and other places that agree to accept 
the charges. Under most plans, the cardholder can elect to pay the entire balance in one 
payment or to pay in installments under arrangements similar to a loan account.  
 
The credit card records that are important to the economic crime investigator are the 
application for a card and the bank’s copies of  monthly statements sent to the cardholder.  
Credit card applications require a considerable amount of financial information, and some of 
the information may be the same as that found on an application for a bank loan. In today’s 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.823 
environment, credit cards may be tied to bank accounts and may not require a separate 
application.  
 
Credit card statements also contain a great deal of important information. Generally, these 
statements contain the name of the credit card issuer, the cardholder’s account number, a 
summary of the transactions on the account, payment information, and a list of all the 
transactions that occurred during that months billing cycle (i.e., purchases, payments, credits, 
cash advances, and balance transfers). 
 
Bank Collection Department Records 
The bank’s collection department, which is normally involved in collecting amounts due on 
installment contracts and notes, can be used to collect personal checks (usually in large 
amounts and with special instructions), thus circumventing the normal record-keeping 
associated with checking accounts. Such a transaction will not be reflected on the target’s 
regular checking account statements but will appear in the collection department records. A 
copy of the check also will be microfilmed. 
 
Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Safe-deposit boxes are private vault spaces rented by banks to customers. Because state laws 
differ, the nature of the relationship varies between a bank and the safe-deposit box holders. 
Banks keep no record of safe-deposit box contents and rarely know what the boxes contain. 
The rental contract records identify the renters, the person or people who have access to the 
boxes, their signatures, and the dates of the original agreements and later renewals. They also 
might contain other identifying information, including the name of the initiating bank 
officer. The officer’s name could be significant if the subject (who might have used an alias 
in renting the box) must be identified. 
 
Records showing access to the boxes vary from bank to bank. But generally, they contain the 
signatures of the people entering the boxes and usually the dates and times of entry. The 
entry records are filed in box-number order. The frequency of entry and the times and dates 
of entries might be significant and might correspond to the times and dates of deposits or 
withdrawals from other accounts or to the purchases and sales of securities, property, and in 
other situations. 
 
Because the bank records will not show the contents of the box, the fraud examiner can 
request permission to inventory the box with the target present, carefully noting and 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
describing the exact contents (for example, legal description on deeds, numbers of insurance 
policies, etc.). 
 
Bank Secrecy Act Documents 
Under the Bank Secrecy Act, banks and other financial institutions are required to file 
Currency Transaction Reports, Suspicious Activity Reports, and other reports detailing large 
cash transactions or suspicious activity. (See the chapter on “Money Laundering” in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for a complete description of 
each report.) These reports will reflect the identity, address, and Social Security number of 
the person making the cash transaction, total amount, and certain other information. Some 
organizations are exempt from the filing requirement, including certain high-volume cash 
businesses, governmental agencies, and payroll account holders.  
 
Stock Brokerage Records 
Many stock brokerage houses now offer the same type of services as banks, such as check-
 writing privileges, credit cards, loans (against the value of securities held), as well as their 
normal securities business. All records pertaining to the subject should be requested; 
however, make sure that the request specifically includes the following: 
• Application: When a customer opens an account, he typically will fill out an account 
application that will contain personal and financial data, such as bank accounts. 
• Customer account cards:  This card is kept in the broker’s files for reference. It will include all 
transactions conducted for the customer. 
• Signature card: A signature card should be on file, which will show all those authorized to 
conduct transactions on the account. 
• Securities receipts:  These receipts are issued to a customer when he delivers securities to the 
broker for sale. 
• Cash receipts: These receipts are issued to a customer when he delivers currency to the 
broker. 
• Confirmation slips: These are issued to a customer to show the type of transaction (buy or 
sell) and the amount involved in the transaction. 
• Securities delivered receipt:  This receipt is signed by the customer when a securities purchase 
is delivered to the customer. 
• Brokerage account statement: This statement is usually issued monthly and provides 
information on all transactions conducted during the reporting period. It lists all 
purchases and sales, the name of the security, the number of units, the amount per unit, 
the total amount of the transaction, the account balance, payments received from the 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.825 
customer, disbursements to the customer, and the securities that are held by the 
brokerage firm for the customer. 
 
Concerning stock brokerage records, the examiner is primarily interested in the source of the 
funds used to purchase securities or deposited to a cash account. The subject’s monthly 
account statements, which are somewhat more complex than equivalent bank statements, 
reflect these transactions. They can be interpreted with the help of explanatory material on 
the statement or with the assistance of an employee of the firm. Receipts for stock purchases 
and deposits should reflect whether the payment was in currency or check and the ABA 
code of the bank on which the check was drawn. Brokerage checks issued to the subject 
from stock sale proceeds also should be examined, as these might be deposited directly to a 
new account or endorsed over and paid directly to third parties for the purchase of assets. 
 
Tax Returns and Related Documents 
Personal tax returns, if available, might provide indirect evidence of illicit payments, such as 
profits or losses from previously undisclosed business ventures, or interest and dividends on 
hidden CDs and bank accounts. The returns might also reveal deductions and expenses, 
such as real estate taxes, that can lead to previously unknown funds or assets. Commercial 
bribes are often reported as consulting fees or other miscellaneous income. The target’s 
accountant and tax preparer should also be interviewed, and their files and work papers 
subpoenaed, if possible. 
 
Establish a Database 
After obtaining the relevant financial records, the examiner should establish a database or 
spreadsheet for analysis. By placing the records into a standardized format, the fraud 
examiner will be more easily able to compare records, uncover patterns, and extract various 
representations of the data.  
 
Both spreadsheets and databases have benefits and drawbacks. The benefits of using 
spreadsheets include: (1) most individuals who work in the financial sector are familiar with 
spreadsheets; (2) spreadsheets allow data to be translated easily into bar, pie, and other 
graphic charts; (3) they allow data to be filtered and sorted easily; (4) and spreadsheets allow 
for the use of pivot tables to display data. Spreadsheets, however, are restricted to a limited 
number of records and may require a large amount of hard-drive space for data storage. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Conversely, databases are more effective than spreadsheets when dealing with large sets of 
records. Databases offer the following features: (1) data can be sorted and manipulated 
easily; (2) changes to records can automatically update queries and reports; and (3) relational 
tables and forms can be used to reduce data entry time. In some environments (such as 
Microsoft Office), data can be easily switched from a spreadsheet to a database, and vice 
versa, for ease of manipulation or display. 
 
Regardless of the type of program used, the information used is the same. The type of 
information retrieved from financial records is the data entered into the spreadsheet or 
database. Each column or field holds some type of information, and this information forms 
the basis for the columns used. As illustrated in the table below, there are 16 primary 
elements that can be pulled from banking records. An additional field for comments is added 
for miscellaneous data. 
 
1. Check number 9. Signatory 
2. Entity from 10. Account number from 
3. Bank from 11. Transaction type 
4. Date written 12. First endorser 
5. Payee 13. Transaction bank 
6. Amount written 14. Deposited to account 
7. Amount deposited 15. Date of transaction 
8. Memo written 16. Comments 
 17. Location 
 
Details on what goes into each of these fields are provided below: 
1. Check number : This field should contain the number of the financial instrument written on 
or deposited to the account. The following items, however, will not contain a check 
number: wire transaction, automated teller machine transaction, point-of-sale 
transaction, and debit memo. A deposited amount would include a check number unless 
the deposit was cash, an incoming wire, or a credit memo. 
2. Entity from : This field should contain the name of the company or person the check is 
from—the owner of the account on which the check is written.  
3. Bank from : This field should contain the name of the bank from which the check, debit 
memo, or wire transfer was issued. If desired, the ABA bank number can also be entered 
to identify the bank’s source of the funds. 
4. Date written : This field should contain the date the check was written, the transaction 
(e.g., wire transfer or debit memo) was generated, or the withdrawal was made. This is 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.827 
not the date shown on the bank statement; bank statements show the clearing dates—
 the dates that checks clear the bank. The clearing date can be used if no other dates are 
present (e.g., if there is no check copy provided by the bank, but the check is listed on 
the statement). 
5. Payee : This field should contain the name of the payee—the person or entity to whom 
the check was written.  
6. Amount written : This field should contain the amount written on the face of the check. If 
there is a discrepancy between the numerical and written amounts,  the bank will usually 
honor the written amount. Check the amount the bank has imprinted on the bottom 
right-hand side of the check in magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) to determine 
which amount the bank used. 
7. Deposited amount : This field should contain the amount of money credited to the bank 
account by a cash or check deposit, wire transfer, or credit memo. This amount is put 
into a field separate from the amount written for ease of separating, sorting, and adding 
the amounts. 
8. Memo : This field should contain any notation written on the “Memo” line or box on the 
check. 
9. Signatory : This field should contain the name of the person (or persons) who signed the 
check as the authorized signatory. When entering the data into this field, initials are 
sufficient if the person referenced is clear. 
10. Account number from : This field should contain the account number on which the check, 
debit memo, or wire transfer was written. 
11. Transaction type : This field should contain the type of transaction (e.g., check, transfer, 
wire, debit memo, credit memo, deposit, ATM deposit or withdrawal, or ATM 
purchase).  
12. First endorser : This field should contain the name of  the first endorser. The first endorser 
is the person or persons who endorsed the check (i.e., signed the check on the back as 
the endorser). On checks made out to a company,  the back of the check may be 
stamped with the company name, bank, and account number and no endorsing signature 
should be shown.  
13. Transaction bank : This field should contain the name of the bank the item was deposited 
to (or where the check was cashed). This could be the bank from which records have 
been subpoenaed, the bank stamped on the back of the check, or the bank at which the 
check was cashed. If the check was negotiated at a non-bank financial institution (e.g., 
check cashing agency, money transmitter, or casino), the name of that company can be 
placed here with other specifics entered in the “comments” field. 
14. Deposited to account : This field should contain the account number to which the check was 
deposited. It should be noted that some banks write the account number on the back of 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.828   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
checks when cashed; this serves as an identifier for the check casher. Therefore, a bank 
account number located on the back of a check may not mean that the check was 
deposited into that account. Remember to check the front of the check for a “cashed” 
stamp. 
15. Date of transaction : This field should contain the date the check was deposited or 
negotiated. 
16. Comments : The comments field is used for other comments about the transaction. NSF 
could be entered into the comments field to signify that there were non-sufficient funds 
to cover the check. Additional information about the endorser (e.g., driver’s license or 
alien registration number), the name of a secondary endorser, or notes written on the 
back of the check by the teller could also be placed in the comments field.  
1 7.  Location : This field should be used for transactions made at an automated teller machine 
or a point-of-sale if the location is important. 
 
There are three rules to follow when entering records into a spreadsheet or database:  
• Enter data as fully as possible 
• Be consistent in referring to entities 
• Have all records reviewed for accuracy 
 
Entering the data completely will help avoid having to enter data into the records a second 
time. In the past, some users of financial records entered the check and deposit data located 
on the statements first, and then entered the information from cancelled checks as the 
checks were obtained. This, however, should not be done. Although transactions that are 
found only on statements can be entered into the database, check and deposit data should be 
entered from the checks written and deposit slips.  
 
When inputting data, consistency is important. Even if check writers have not been 
consistent in their spelling or use of names, the entered data must be consisted. Otherwise, 
the sorting results will not be accurate. If, for example, a different version of a name is used, 
the various names can be placed in the comments field. 
 
Finally, all records entered should be double or triple-checked for accuracy. It is preferable 
that the review is conducted by someone who did not enter the data because it is hard to 
catch one’s own errors. For example, one way to check the amounts in a field is by tying 
them to the totals on the statements.  
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.829 
Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions 
In contrast to the direct approach method of proving income, which relies on specific 
transactions, the indirect approach relies on circumstantial proof of income using such as the 
net worth analysis. 
 
Almost all individuals and business entities determine income by the specific-items or 
specific - transactions method. Most entities engaged in legitimate pursuits maintain books 
and records in which they record transactions as they occur, and their income computations 
are based upon the total transactions during a given period. In fraud examinations, income 
can usually be established more readily by the direct approach; for this reason, it should be 
used whenever possible. 
 
In many fraud schemes, however, a subject’s books and records are not made available to 
the examiner. Therefore, an indirect approach must be taken using one of the following 
methods: the net worth analysis: asset method, the expenditures (source and application of 
funds) method, or the bank deposit analysis method. Although these methods are 
circumstantial proof, courts have approved their use in civil and criminal cases on the theory 
that proof of a subject’s unexplained funds or property might establish a prima facie 
understatement of income.  
 
Elements of Financial Examination Techniques 
To examine company books and records for fraud, the fraud examiner must know and 
understand the environment in which the entity operates, the entity’s accounting system 
(including the types of schemes relevant to the entity and the controls that are designed to 
prevent fraud), basic concealment methods, and various detection techniques. 
 
The Environment 
It is critical to understand the business (or government) environment where the entity 
operates. To understand the environment, you must have a firm grasp of the nature of the 
business, the competition, the market share, the financing structure, the vendors (suppliers), 
major customers, the methods of receipts (i.e., cash or on account) and disbursements, the 
procurement methods (i.e., whether goods and services are obtained through a bidding 
process or not), the general economic climate, and the personnel pool available to the entity. 
It is through the understanding of the entity as an operating enterprise that you can assess 
the risks associated with the particular operations. The risks and peculiarities of the entity 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
will help shape the nature of potential fraud schemes that can be perpetrated by the entity’s 
employees. 
 
The Accounting System 
Understanding the basic accounting system and its integration with the operations of the 
business is important. The basic accounting system, including the system of internal 
controls, is the key element in providing evidence of past, present, and future internal fraud. 
Internal fraud that is on-book will appear within the entity’s financial records. The audit trail 
might be obscure, but it will exist nonetheless. If the internal fraud is off-book, then other 
evidence might, with diligent fraud examination techniques, be uncovered. 
 
All internal fraud has an impact on the bottom line. However, fraud in small amounts will be 
harder to detect because of its immaterial amount relative to the financial statements as a 
whole. If an internal fraud scheme is large enough, it will have an effect on the entity’s 
financial statements.  
 
Various Detection Techniques 
Though there are many fraud detection methods, whatever method is employed will usually 
require the examination of source documents. Many times, these source documents provide 
the evidence necessary to prove fraud in a court of law. Additionally, in many cases, the 
source documents will help establish the intent of the fraud offenders. 
 
Individual or groups of documents can be examined in several ways to detect possible fraud. 
Because most internal fraud is continuous in nature, groups of documents can be analyzed 
for exceptions and trends. Many times a large population must be sampled to determine, 
with statistical validity, if documents have been altered. Statistical sampling quantifies the risk 
of arriving at an incorrect conclusion; it is generally necessary with large populations. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fraud examiners want to examine sales invoices for proper approvals in a company with $2 
billion in annual sales. The average sales inv oice is $15,000. By selecting a valid statistical 
sample of sales, the examiners can project the effectiveness of internal controls regarding the 
approval of the sales invoices, assuming proper interpretation of test results. If deficiencies exist 
in the controls, then those results should become apparent in the test results. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.831 
Statistical Sampling 
If an anomaly is found in the financial statements and transactions and further investigation 
is desired, it might be appropriate to pull a statistical sample. By using statistical sampling, 
the examiner can look at fewer transactions rather than the entire population.  
 
There are two basic risks associated with statistical sampling: sampling risk and nonsampling 
risk. Sampling risk  is the probability that the sample is not representative of the population; 
nonsampling risk  is the possibility of making the wrong decision. Nonsampling risk cannot be 
quantified. However, fraud examiners can control it through adequate planning and 
supervision of audit engagements. 
 
When using statistical sampling, you must draw a random sample. That is, each member of 
the population must have an equal chance of being selected. There are two primary types of 
statistical sampling: attribute and discovery. 
 
SAMPLING FOR ATTRIBUTES 
Sampling for attributes is used by auditors or fraud examiners looking for a deviation 
occurrence rate (deviations, errors, and exceptions  are synonyms). When performing this type of 
sampling, you are looking for the presence or absence of a defined condition. 
 
EXAMPLE 
For each sales invoice in the sample, is there a corresponding shipping order? The answer to the 
question can only be “yes” or “no.” If the control condition is that each sales invoice is not 
recorded until there has been a shipping order attached, then any “no” response for a booked 
sale would represent an error. 
 
DISCOVERY SAMPLING 
This is the best type of sampling for auditing for fraud because it is sampling until one 
occurrence is found. Discovery sampling deals with the probability of discovering at least 
one error in a given sample size if the population error is a certain percentage. This type of 
sampling is directed toward a specific objective, such as: 
 
EXAMPLE 
“If I believe some kind of error or irregularity might exist in the records, what sample size will I have to 
audit to have assurance of finding at least one example?” 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Discovery sampling is best used when looking for things such as forged checks or 
intercompany sales that have been improperly classified as sales to outsiders. 
 
RANDOM SAMPLES 
When using the discovery-sampling technique, the selection of samples should be done 
randomly. For a sample to be random, every member of the population must have an equal 
opportunity of being selected.  
 
Items in the population can be numbered and selected by reference to a random number 
table. Or if the items in the population already have numbers (such as check numbers or 
invoice numbers) then a random sample can be selected by using a random number 
generator from a computer software program. To select a random sample, (1) identify a 
number for every item in the population, (2) correspond the random numbers with each 
item in the population, (3) select the route through the random number table, and (4) select 
the sample.  
 
Additionally, make sure that you consistently follow the pattern picked for corresponding 
random numbers to items in the population and that you document the random number 
selection process in the event the sample needs rechecking or additional sample items need 
to be selected for testing. If the sample is selected randomly and the sample is large enough, 
then the sample should represent the population.  
 
DOCUMENTS 
Fraud will often be concealed in questionable documents. Missing or altered documents are 
some of the principal indicators of fraud, and such occurrences should be thoroughly 
investigated. Certain documents are a natural part of the accounting system. However, when 
a pattern of these documents occurs, or an unusual quantity of these documents is noted, 
further examination might be warranted. 
 
The common-sense test should be applied to any document that appears to have 
questionable features under the circumstances, such as amounts too high or too low; odd 
names, times, and places; and identical names and addresses. Fraud can often involve 
questionable journal entries in the records, such as inappropriate charges to expense 
accounts or inventory. For example, large journal entries in the inventory accounts near the 
end of the year might point to a cover-up of inventory theft. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.833 
An overabundant number of voids might mean that a fraudster is voiding legitimate sales 
and pocketing the proceeds. Excessive credit memos might also signal the reversal of 
legitimate sales and the diversion of cash. Too many late charges might indicate that an 
account receivable is delinquent because it is a fictitious account and, therefore, will never be 
paid. Stale items on any reconciliation bear watching. For example, stale outstanding checks 
may indicate attempted concealment of embezzlement losses or diverted cash. Original 
documents, such as invoices, should be used to authorize transactions because photocopied 
or duplicate documents can be subject to manipulation and alteration. 
 
Net-Worth Methods 
Examining for fraud not only involves the examination of the entity’s books and records, it 
might also entail the estimation of the fraud suspect’s change in net worth or expenditures. 
If fraud is suspected, then using either of the net-worth methods might help in establishing 
evidence of a fraud. 
 
The net-worth method (or comparative net-worth analysis) is used to prove illicit income 
circumstantially, by showing that a person’s assets or expenditures for a given period exceed 
that which can be accounted for from known or admitted sources of income. The net-worth 
method is a reliable method for estimating a person’s ill-gotten gains. The method is used 
extensively by the Internal Revenue Service, especially in drug and money laundering cases. 
 
The net-worth method relies on the familiar balance sheet format readily recognizable in the 
business world and presents a complete financial picture of a subject. It is based on the 
theory that increases or decreases in a person’s net worth during a period, adjusted for living 
expenses, allow a determination of income. 
 
Net worth  can be defined as the difference between assets and liabilities at a particular point in 
time. By comparing the subject’s net worth at the beginning and end of a period, usually a 
calendar year, the economic crime investigator can determine the increase or decrease in net 
worth. Adjustments are then made for living expenses to arrive at income. Income includes 
receipts derived from all sources. Thus, by subtracting funds from known sources (salary, 
wages, interest, or dividends, for example), funds from unknown or illegal sources can  
be calculated. 
 
The courts approved using the net-worth method in the leading Supreme Court case of 
Holland v. United States, 348 U.S. 121 (1954), along with the three companion cases, Smith v. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
United States, 348 U.S. 147 (1954); Friedberg v. United States, 348 142 (1954); and United States v. 
Calderon, 348 U.S. 160 (1954). These cases outlined broad principles to govern the trial and 
review of cases based on the net-worth method of proving income. 
 
The net-worth method is often used when several of the subject’s assets or liabilities have 
changed during the period under examination and when the target’s financial records are not 
available. 
 
An individual’s assets, liabilities, and living expenses can be determined from a variety of 
sources, such as: 
• The subject 
• Informants or sources 
• Real estate records 
• Judgment and lien records 
• Bankruptcy records 
• State motor vehicle records 
• Loan applications 
• Financial statements 
• Accountant’s work papers 
• Lawsuits and depositions 
• Surveillance 
• Credit card applications or statements 
• Tax returns 
• Insurance records 
• Child support and divorce records 
• Employment applications and salary checks 
• Companions or associates 
• Canceled checks and deposited items 
 
The question might arise regarding why items that do not change should be included in the 
net-worth statement, particularly since they have no bearing on the final result. The answer is 
that a net-worth statement gives a complete financial picture of the subject and therefore 
should be as complete as possible so that the target will not be able to contest it on the 
grounds that items were omitted. Additionally, the net-worth statement can be the 
foundation for examination of the subject, and a complete statement will prove extremely 
valuable at that time. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.835 
There are two basic methods of net-worth computation: The asset method and the expenditures  
or sources and applications of funds method. They are discussed in detail herein. 
 
The asset method should be used when the subject has invested illegal funds to accumulate 
wealth and acquire assets, causing net worth (value of assets over liabilities) to increase from 
year to year. The expenditures method  is best used when the subject spends illicit income on 
consumables (such as travel and entertainment) that would not cause an increase in  
net worth. 
 
Each method has similar steps. Begin both methods by assembling the financial and 
behavioral profile. Identify all major assets and liabilities, sources of income, and major 
expenses during the relevant period. The increase, if any, in the subject’s net worth or the 
level of expenditures is then compared to the legitimate funds available. Unaccounted funds 
might be inferred to come from illicit or hidden sources. 
 
THE FINANCIAL PROFILE 
The first step is to prepare the financial profile  of the suspect. The financial profile is 
essentially a financial statement with certain modifications and additions that shows what the 
defendant owns, owes, earns, and spends at any given point or over a period of time. The 
profile might yield direct evidence of illegal income or hidden assets, or circumstantial 
evidence thereof, by showing that the suspect’s expenditures exceeded known sources of 
income. 
 
The financial profile will identify most illicit funds that are deposited to accounts or 
expended in significant amounts. It will not catch relatively small currency transactions, 
particularly if they were for concealed activities, consumables, or for unusual one-time 
expenses such as medical bills. 
 
Determine the target’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses from the following sources: 
• Interviews 
• The target 
• Associates 
• Documents from financial sources (e.g., accountant, banker) 
• Bank account records 
• Mortgage and loan files 
• Credit card records 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tax returns 
• Public records 
• Business filings 
• Real estate filings 
• Court records 
 
To prepare the financial profile, follow the following six steps.  
 
STEP 1 
Identify all significant assets held by the suspect. An asset is cash (on hand) or anything else 
of value that can be converted into cash.  
 
Cash on hand is coin and currency (bills, coins, Federal Reserve notes) in the subject’s 
possession (on the subject’s person, in the subject ’s residence or other place in a nominee’s 
hands, or in a safe-deposit box). It does not include money in any account with a financial 
institution. When using the net-worth method, the item that may be the most difficult to 
verify is the amount of cash on hand, which is usually claimed by defendants to be sufficient 
to account for all or part of the unknown sources of income. To establish a firm starting net 
worth, it must be shown that the target had no large cash sums for which he was not given 
credit. This is usually done by offering evidence that negates the existence of a cash hoard. 
Such evidence might include: 
• Written or oral admissions of the subject concerning net worth (a signed net-worth 
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand) 
• Low earnings in pre-examination years, as shown by records of former employers 
and/or tax returns filed by subject 
• Net worth, as established by books and records of the subject 
• Financial statement presented for credit or other purposes at a time before or during the 
period under examination (banks, loan companies, and bonding companies are some of 
the better sources from which to obtain this type of document) 
• Bankruptcy before examination periods 
• Prior indebtedness, compromise of overdue debts, and avoidance of bankruptcy 
• Installment buying 
• History of low earnings and expenditures, and checks returned for insufficient funds (a 
financial history covering members of the subject’s family also might be helpful) 
• Loss of furniture and business because of financial reasons 
• Receipt of some type of public assistance 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.837 
STEP 2 
Identify all significant liabilities. A liability is an obligation (debt) arising from an oral or 
written promise to pay.  
 
STEP 3 
Identify all income sources during the relevant time period. Income includes money or other 
things of value received in exchange for services or goods. Income is never included as an 
asset. Loan proceeds are not included as income but are treated as an asset that is offset by a 
corresponding liability. 
 
STEP 4 
Identify all significant expenses incurred during the relevant period. An expense is any 
payment for consumables, for personal or business reasons, over the relevant time period. 
Expenses are not included as liabilities. 
 
STEP 5 
Analyze the information you have collected by using the following charts. 
 
The Financial Profile 
 
TYPICAL ASSETS For each significant asset determine : 
 
Residence 
Real estate 
Bank accounts 
Stocks and 
bonds 
Automobiles 
Insurance 
Cash on hand 
 
Jewelry 
Clothing 
Collectibles 
Pensions 
Home 
furnishings 
Boats 
 
—When was it acquired and from whom? 
—How much did it cost?  
—How was it paid for (currency, check, cashier’s 
check)? 
—What source of funds was used to acquire it? 
—What documentation exists for the purchase and 
where is it? 
 
 
 
TYPICAL LIABILITIES For each significant liability determine: 
 
Mortgage(s) 
Other loans 
Lines of credit 
Credit cards  
Installment purchases 
Accounts payable 
 
—What was the original amount of the liability? 
—What is the present balance due? 
—When was the liability incurred? 
—What was the purpose for the loan or debt? 
—How were the proceeds used and where were they 
deposited? 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Taxes and other bills 
Alimony and child support 
— What security (collateral), if any, was given for the 
debt? 
— What documentation exists for the transaction and 
where is it? 
— Was the debt written off as a bad loan for tax 
purposes? 
— Who was the creditor or lender? 
 
 
TYPICAL SOURCES OF FUNDS 
 
For each source of funds determine: 
 
Salary 
Gifts 
Rental income 
Dividends 
Interest 
Sale of assets 
 
Insurance 
proceeds 
Commissions 
and fees 
Awards 
Inheritances 
Disability 
payments 
 
— What was the total amount during a given period? 
— What was the source? 
— How was it paid for (currency, check, other means)? 
— When were the funds received? 
— Where was it deposited? 
— How was it spent? 
— What documentation exists (e.g., W-2 or 1099 
forms) and where is it? 
 
TYPICAL EXPENDITURES 
For each major expenditure item determine : 
 
Rent and 
mortgage 
Health costs 
Interest on 
loans 
Credit cards 
Car payments 
Travel 
 
Clothing 
Utilities 
Food 
Insurance  
 
 
— What was the total amount spent? 
— How was it paid for? 
— Where were the funds obtai ned to pay the expense? 
— What documentation exists and where is it? 
— When was the payment made? 
 
THE BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The financial profile might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless certain activities 
are identified, which is done through preparing the behavioral profile. The behavioral profile 
might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such as large debts, as well as 
additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent significant amounts of 
cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from his disclosed bank accounts, or no 
admitted sources of cash income, he must have  other undisclosed sources of income. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.839 
Using the financial/behavioral profile as a guide, request an interview with the suspect. Pin 
down the suspect’s income, assets, and accounts. Otherwise, the subject might invent 
excuses or prepare false testimony or documentation to account for the unexplained income. 
 
Net-Worth Analysis 
Any recipient of funds, whether honest or suspect, has only four ways of disposing of 
income: save it, buy assets, pay off debts, or spend it. 
 
Net-worth analysis begins with the completion of a suspect’s financial profile. Through 
identification of the suspect’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, a net-worth statement 
can be determined. Once a net-worth statement is completed through the identification of a 
suspect’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, changes in the suspect’s net worth can be 
compared to his known income, and differences can be inferred to be from unknown 
sources. 
 
COMPARATIVE NET WORTH: ASSET METHOD  
Again, the asset method is advisable when it is suspected that the subject has purchased 
assets or otherwise increased his net worth. It can be applied for any number of years, but, 
ideally, it is best to start with the year before the suspected fraudulent activity began. The 
formula is: 
 
 Assets 
– Liabilities 
= Net worth 
– Prior year’s net worth 
= Net worth increase 
+ Living expenses 
= Income (or expenditures) 
– Funds from known sources 
= Funds from unknown sources 
 
In computing the comparative net worth, these issues should be considered: 
• All assets should be valued at cost, not fair market value. Subsequent appreciation or 
depreciation of assets is ignored. 
• The amount of funds available to the subject from legitimate sources should be 
estimated or computed generously. The amount of the subject’s expenditures, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
particularly hard-to-document living costs, such as food and entertainment, should be 
estimated conservatively to give the subject the benefit of any doubt. In attempting to 
estimate personal living expenses, you should consult the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
This agency publishes an annual table that details personal living expenses such as 
utilities, food, and gas. 
• Always attempt to interview the subject to identify all alleged sources of funds and to 
negate defenses that he might raise later. 
 
To compute the comparative net worth using the asset method, perform the following steps: 
• Establish the starting point, generally the year before the target’s illegal activities begin. 
This will be referred to as “year one” in the following computations. 
• Compute the target’s net worth at the end of year one. Identify all assets held by the 
subject, valued at cost, including assets acquired earlier, and the amount of current 
liabilities. 
 
The difference between the value of the assets and the liabilities is the target’s net worth at 
year one, or “opening net worth.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Year One 
Assets at Cost               Liabilities 
Residence $100,000  Mort gage balance $ 90,000 
Stocks and bonds 30,000  Automobile loan  
Automobile 20,000  balance 10,000 
 TOTAL $150,000  TOTAL $100,000 
 
Assets $150,000
 Liabilities -100,000
 Net Worth $50,000
  
Compute the target’s net worth for year two, using the same method. 
 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.841 
EXAMPLE 
Year Two 
                     Assets at Cost                                          Liabilities 
Residence $100,000  Mortgage balance $50,000 
Stocks and bonds 30,000    
Automobile 20,000  Automobile loan  
CD 50,000  balance  0  
 TOTAL $200,000  TOTAL $50,000  
 
Assets $200,000
 Liabilities -50,000
 Net Worth $150,000
  
Note that in the example the target’s net wo rth increased by $100,000 during year two. 
To determine the source of such an increase, determine the target’s known income, 
during year two, and subtract known expenses for year two. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Year Two 
               Income                            Expenses 
Salary $30,000  Mortgage interest 
payments 
 
$20,000 
Commissions 20,000  Living expenses 10,000  
 TOTAL $50,000  TOTAL $30,000 
   
The difference between the target’s income and expenses equals the increase (or decrease) in 
net worth from year one to year two, which can be attributed to known sources. Here it is 
$20,000. Subtract the increase in net worth fr om known sources from the total increase in 
net worth to determine the amount from unknown sources. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 Total increase in net worth $100,000 
 Increase attributed to known sources <20,000>  
 Dollars from unknown sources $80,000 
 
Repeat the above steps for subsequent years as necessary.  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXPENDITURES METHOD 
The expenditures method (also known as the sources and application of funds method) 
compares the suspect’s known expenditures and known sources of funds during a given 
period of time. Any excess expenditures must be the result of income from unknown 
sources. It is closely related to the net-worth analysis, accounting variations of the same 
principle. 
 
The table below illustrates the formula used to compute net worth using the expenditures 
method. The steps are discussed in greater detail below  
 
Expenditures  (Application of Funds)  
– Known source of funds  
= Funds from unknown sources  
 
To compute the subject’s net worth using the expenditures method, follow three steps. First, 
establish the subject’s known expenditures for the relevant year. Expenditures include the 
use or application of funds for any purpose, including deposits to bank accounts, purchase 
of major assets, travel and entertainment expenses, and payment of loan and credit card 
debts. Second, identify all sources of funds available to the subject, including loans and gifts, 
as well as cash on hand from previous years. Third, compute the difference between the 
amount of the suspect’s expenditures and his known income to determine the amount 
attributed to unknown sources. 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.843 
EXAMPLE 
Subject   Year One  Year Two  
Application of funds:  
 Increase in bank balance  $2,000 $10,000 
 Down payment on residence    ——  10,000  
 Purchase of automobile  10,000  ——— 
 Mortgage payments  8,000  20,000 
 Credit card payments  5,000  10,000 
 Other expenses  15,000  30,000 
 TOTAL  $40,000 $ 80,000 
Less: known sources of funds  
   Cash on hand 1,000  
   Salary 30,000 38,000 
   Interest earned on savings  
   Account 1,000 2,000 
   Loan proceeds 8,000  
 TOTAL $40,000 $ 40,000 
Funds from unk nown or illegal sources   0 $40,000 
 
The following example demonstrates how a net-worth analysis assisted prosecutors in their 
amended complaint against a fraud suspect. 
 
EXAMPLE 
R. Peery, age 40, the executive director of a five-state commission planning a low-level 
radioactive waste dump was charged with two ne w charges of felony theft. Peery was also 
charged with one federal count of wire fraud. 
 
Peery was accused of wiring $115,000 to a personal account in Georgia, and prosecutors 
said they suspected him of taking $600,000. He was also charged with  two counts of using 
commission funds in Nebraska to buy cars, a 1990 BMW valued  at $67,000 and a 
1991 BMW valued at $92,000. 
 
Peery was paid $52,000 annually. He lived in a house valued at $305,000 and at the 
time of his arrest had six luxury cars, including Jaguars, Mercedes-Benzes, and BMWs.  
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bank Deposit Analysis Method 
The bank deposit analysis method is another method to prove unknown sources of funds by 
indirect or circumstantial evidence. Like the other indirect methods of proof, the bank 
deposits method computes income by showing what happened to a subject’s funds. It is 
based on the theory that if a subject receives money, he can only do two things with it: he 
can deposit it or he can spend it.  
 
This method is applied when assets and liabilities are fairly constant from year to year and 
indications of extravagant expenditures are non-existent, but through investigation, the 
suspect’s known sources of income are being deposited into financial institutions. 
 
Under this method, income is proved through analyzing bank deposits, canceled checks, and 
the subject’s currency transactions. Adjustments for non-income items are made to arrive at 
income. A basic formula for the bank deposits method is: 
 
Total Deposits to All Accounts  
– Transfer and redeposits 
= Net deposits to all accounts 
+ Cash expenditures 
= Total receipts from all sources 
– Funds from known sources 
= Funds from unknown or illegal sources 
 
The bank deposits method is recommended as a primary method of proof when most of the 
subject’s income is deposited and the subject’s books and records are unavailable, withheld, 
incomplete, or maintained on a cash basis. Use of the bank deposits method is not limited to 
these circumstances, however. Even though the target’s books and records might appear to 
be complete and accurate, the method can still be used and there is no requirement to 
disprove the accuracy of the books and records. 
 
The basic sources of information for this analysis include  interviews, analyses of the books 
and records, and analyses of the bank accounts. A thorough interview will determine the 
subject’s expenditures by cash and checks, identi fy all bank accounts, and determine all loans 
and other receipts. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.845 
Total Deposits 
Total deposits consist not only of amounts deposited to all bank accounts maintained or 
controlled by the target but also deposits made to accounts in savings and loan companies, 
investment trusts, brokerage houses, and credit unions. Total deposits also include the 
accumulation (increase) of cash on hand. Because some subjects have bank accounts in 
fictitious names or under special titles, such as “Special Account No. 1,” “Trustee Account,” 
or “Trading Account,” the investigator should  look for this type of account during the 
investigation. If a subject lists checks on a deposit ticket and deducts an amount paid to him 
in cash (split deposit), only the net amount of the deposit should be used in computing  
total deposits. 
 
Additional items that must be included in deposits are property and notes that the subject 
received in payment for services. The accepted practice is to consider these items as 
depositories into which funds have been placed for future use. 
 
Net Deposits 
All transfers or exchanges between bank accounts as well as funds that are redeposited are 
non-income items and are subtracted from total deposits to yield net deposits. Failure to 
eliminate these items would result in an overstatement of income. 
 
Cash Expenditures 
Cash expenditures consist of the total outlay of funds less net bank disbursements. The total 
outlay of funds includes all payments made by cash or check. There is no need to determine 
which part was paid by cash and which part by check. Total outlays include but are not 
limited to: 
• Purchase of capital assets to investments (determined from settlement sheets, invoices, 
statements, and the like) 
• Loan repayments (determined from loan ledgers of banks or other creditors) 
• Living expenses (can be determined from the same sources presented in the net worth 
and expenditures sections) 
• Purchases, business expenses (less noncash items, such as depreciation), rental expenses, 
and the like 
 
  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Net bank disbursements can be determined by the following formula: 
 
Net Deposits to All Accounts  
+ Beginning balances 
= Net bank funds available 
– Ending balances 
= Net banking disbursements 
 
Funds from known sources include, but are not limited to salaries, business profits, 
insurance proceeds, gifts received, loans, and inheritances. Funds from known sources are 
subtracted from total receipts (or income) to arrive at funds from unknown or  
illegal sources. 
 
Rebutting Defenses to Indirect Methods of Proof 
Circumstantial evidence of excess income is often met with the defense that the extra funds 
came from cash accumulated earlier or from other legitimate sources, such as loans from 
relatives. To rebut these defenses, the fraud examiner must pin down the amount of cash on 
hand at the beginning of the relevant period (through, for example, amounts listed on 
financial statements or claimed in interviews) and do the following: 
• Obtain a financial history of the target and spouse, through interviews and other means, 
showing dates and places of employment, salary and bonuses, and any other related 
income. 
• Determine whether the spouse had any separate source of funds that were used to 
purchase jointly held assets or deposited in joint accounts. If so, the spouse must be 
included in the financial profile calculations. 
• Claims of a prior substantial cash hoard might be rebutted by showing that the target 
lived penuriously, borrowed money, made installment purchases, incurred large debts, 
was delinquent on accounts, had a poor credit rating, or filed for bankruptcy. Claims that 
cash came from family or other private loans might be rebutted by showing that the 
alleged lender was incapable of generating the amounts supposedly lent, the absence of 
any documentation reflecting the source of the alleged loan (no bank account 
withdrawals), and the absence of other sources of funds available to the lender. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.847 
The net-worth analysis—if records can be obtai ned—is a significant tool in documenting ill-
 gotten gains. With this as a basis, the following section covers the major schemes used to 
commit fraud against companies and governmental agencies. 
 
 
Locating Hidden Assets 
 
Common Asset-Hiding Techniques 
There are many techniques a fraudster might use to hide ill-gotten gains. A target may 
attempt to preserve his assets by opening hidden bank accounts, purchasing real estate 
through a straw or front, or transferring his assets to other parties or to accounts that might 
escape detection. 
 
Transfer to Family Members or Parties Under Their Control 
The most common means of hiding assets, particularly real estate and business interests, is to 
transfer the asset into the hands of another party that will allow the target to maintain 
control. In many cases, the target will transfer the asset to a spouse (or another member of 
the spouse’s family), and a husband might make the transfer in his wife’s maiden name. 
 
Such transfers can be identified through a search of voter registrations, marriage records, and 
probate in the spouse’s maiden name. Transf ers to family members can be detected by 
comparing the target’s previous financial statem ent with the most recent one. Those assets 
appearing on the oldest statement but not appearing on the most recent statement should be 
examined closely to determine the nature of the transaction, the purchaser’s identity, and the 
consideration for the sale. 
 
Children’s or Family Trust 
A target might seek to protect assets by transferring them to a children’s or family trust from 
a personal estate. These assets would then be protected from judgment or bankruptcy 
proceedings in a court of law. If the transfer was made to defeat creditors, however, it can be 
set aside by the court.  
 
Home Mortgage Pay-Down 
In many cases, subjects seek to hide their assets from seizure by prepaying a significant 
portion of their home mortgage. By doing this, the hider may successfully shelter his assets 
in a homestead exemption (as allowed in Texas, Florida, and other states) that will survive 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
bankruptcy or other claims against them. By documenting the mortgage prepayment, the 
fraud examiner can often show undisclosed or hidden income from outside sources. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier’s check for $96,000 was found to ha ve been used as a prepayment to a home 
mortgage. By obtaining the front and back of the cashier’s che ck, fraud examiners were able 
to locate another bank account belonging to the defendant.  
 
Insurance Policies 
Some targets may purchase insurance. Under the terms of a whole life or universal life 
insurance policy, the borrower may make additional payments on the policy. These payments 
accrue at a high interest rate and enhance the overall value of the insurance policy.  
 
A sophisticated subject might deposit substantial monies into an existing insurance policy 
thinking that the fraud examiner will not look beyond the face value of the policy into the 
equity built up by prepayments. The fraud examiner should, therefore, always examine the 
financial statement of a target to locate insurance policies and examine the equity in these 
policies as a potential asset. 
 
Prepaid Credit Cards 
Many credit accounts today permit the card holder to prepay their accounts. Many people 
attempting to hide assets have used the prepayment option to hide cash from creditors. 
Prepayment of credit card accounts can also be found in cash management accounts (CMAs) 
offered by stock brokerage firms. 
 
Savings Bond Purchases 
Drug dealers and tax evaders often use savings bond purchases as a means to conceal  
their ready cash. In several recent cases, defendants in financial crimes have purchased 
bonds in their individual names, their spouses’ names (in their maiden names), or their 
children’s names. 
 
Cashier’s Checks and Traveler’s Checks 
Many criminals purchase cashier’s checks and traveler’s checks to hide their financial 
dealings and reduce the amount of cash they have to carry. By purchasing cashier’s checks or 
traveler’s checks in denominations of less than  $10,000, which is the threshold for filing a 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.849 
Currency Transaction Report (CTR), the criminal can carry negotiable financial instruments 
that can be exchanged almost any place in the world.  
 
Computer Databases 
To begin a computer-based investigation, determine which records are available. Next, 
determine how much record checking is necessary, which records should be focused on, and 
the location of concentration. Areas of concentration might include voter registration 
records, court records, or real estate files.  
 
Locating Assets Through Subpoenas 
Although examiners investigating fraud do not have an absolute right to see non-public 
records, those who are involved in investigations involving civil or criminal proceedings 
might have subpoena power allowing them to obtain such records, including bank account 
and loan records, records from accountants and tax preparers (including income tax returns 
and related documents), mortgage company records, telephone records, credit card 
statements, credit reporting company records, hotel and travel records, telex records, 
overnight package envelopes, and passports. 
 
Locating Assets Offshore 
Some targets might try to hide their assets offshore, often in tax havens and secrecy 
jurisdictions. Historically, some of the most popular offshore jurisdictions have been 
Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, the Netherlands Antilles, and Panama. 
 
To locate offshore assets, fraud examiners should take all of the following steps: 
• Review domestic bank account records for wire transfers or other transactions involving 
offshore bank accounts. 
• Determine whether the subject personally traveled overseas. Overseas travel can often be 
documented from U.S. Customs records available through FinCEN. 
• Attempt to locate the subject’s travel agency. 
 
Attempt to identify means employed to move cash offshore by: 
• Use of multiple cashier’s checks 
• Overnight mail envelopes 
• Other methods 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After funds have been traced offshore, the examiner should look for transfers back to the 
United States. A sophisticated target might use a foreign attorney or bank officer as a trustee 
or front to purchase assets in the United States, or appoint the trustee as manager of a U.S. 
business. 
 
Subjects also might obtain access to their assets offshore by using foreign credit cards. Many 
international institutions now offer MasterCard or Visa accounts, and all account records are 
maintained in the foreign country.  
 
Sophisticated subjects might also obtain foreign passports (in a fictitious name, if requested). 
Some countries offer such passports to people who deposit $25,000 in the state-run financial 
institution. 
 
It may difficult to obtain information on foreign banks, but it is not impossible. D&B 
publishes several guides with information about businesses in Latin America, Europe, and 
other regions of the world. The U.S. Department of Commerce has foreign-country experts 
who can direct you to sources of business information on any country in the world. 
 
Also, with the expansion of the Internet as a means of global communication, information 
on foreign countries and businesses is available through the Internet or through a 
commercial database or online service. 
 
In his book Competitor Intelligence, Leonard Fuld provides a useful chapter on locating 
information on foreign businesses. He suggests the following resources as starting points: 
• Securities brokers with expertise in dealing with foreign businesses 
• The International Trade Commission 
• International trade shows 
• Foreign consulates 
• Foreign chambers of commerce 
• Foreign magazines and directories 
 
Fuld provides a list of consulates, chambers of commerce, magazines, and directories in his 
book. Fuld suggests checking Euromoney 500, which contains profiles of the world’s top 500 
banks, or the Europa World Year Book, which provides basic data on banks around the world. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.851 
The text of newspapers, such as the New York Times  or the Washington Post, may be searched 
for articles on the foreign bank or the foreign country involved. The texts of these and other 
large newspapers are available through online services such as LexisNexis. 
 
If the subject engages in a mail-order or retail business, a simple way to get information 
about his bank accounts is to send him a check. Ronald L. Mendell, in his book How to Do 
Financial Asset Investigations, suggests buying a small item from the subject by using a check. 
When the canceled check is returned, it will provide the name and possibly the account 
number of the subject’s bank. He suggests that if the subject does not engage in mail-order 
sales, the same goal may be accomplished by sending the subject a small “refund” check. 
 
Office of International Affairs 
The U.S. Department of Justice, Office of International Affairs (OIA), in certain 
circumstances, can offer assistance to U.S. fraud examiners seeking to recover  
offshore assets. 
 
OIA is responsible for: 
• Extradition requests 
• Requests for foreign documentary evidence, bank and business records, and other 
official documents 
• Interviews and depositions of foreign witnesses 
• Assistance to obtain appearance of foreign witnesses in U.S. courts 
• Foreign searches and seizures, compelled handwriting exemplars, and  
electronic surveillance 
 
The OIA uses a number of legal resources to  obtain information from foreign countries, 
such as letters rogatory and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties  (MLATs). 
 
LETTERS ROGATORY 
Letters Rogatory are formal requests by the courts of one country to the courts of another 
country.  
 
The information needed for a Letter Rogatory request is as follows: 
• The facts of the case showing at least a reasonable suspicion that the offense under 
investigation might have been committed 
• The names and identifying information of people or entities involved in the matter 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The names and identifying information of witnesses or entities whose names might be 
on bank records (if accounts are held in other names) 
• The names, addresses, and other information concerning banks, businesses, or bank 
account numbers 
• The offenses being investigated or prosecuted in the United States, to include penalties 
• The assistance requested of the foreign country, whether it is documents, testimony, 
freezing of assets, etc. (If you want a foreign magistrate to question a witness, write out 
the questions that you want the witness to be asked, even if you ask to be present during 
the questioning.) 
• The procedures to be followed (how to authenticate business documents and records for 
use in U.S. courts) 
 
The procedure for making formal requests by a Letter Rogatory is as follows: 
• Call the OIA team handling the relevant part of the world concerning the search for 
guidance and assistance. 
• Draft a Letter Rogatory following an exemplar  or other materials provided by the OIA. 
• Have the OIA representative review and approve the draft. 
• The prosecutor will then file a motion in federal court for issuance of a Letter Rogatory, 
together with a memorandum in support and proposed order (submit two copies, one 
for the clerk and one for the foreign court, to be signed by the judge). 
• The judge signs both Letters Rogatory. 
• File one signed Letter Rogatory with the court clerk. 
• Have the court clerk authenticate the second signed Letter Rogatory either via apostille 
or exemplification certificate. 
• Have the Letter Rogatory translated into the proper language. 
• Send the signed Letter Rogatory and translation to the OIA for transmission through 
diplomatic channels to the proper foreign government. 
• The Minister of Justice in the foreign country normally presents the Letter Rogatory to 
the appropriate court. 
• The foreign court determines whether to execute the Letter Rogatory. If the 
determination is favorable, the court then obtains the documents, testimony, and other 
information. 
• Evidence resulting from the execution of the Letter Rogatory is returned through 
diplomatic channels to the OIA. 
• The OIA will then forward the information to the prosecutor. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.853 
Letters Rogatory should be written in simple, non-technical English and should not include 
unnecessary information that may confuse courts in the receiving foreign state. Avoid use of 
the term discovery .” Similarly, to avoid the appearance of  a fishing expedition that may result 
in refusal of the foreign country to execute the request, try not to use phrases such as any and 
all documents. Requests for documents should be as specific as possible. If particular 
procedures to be followed by the foreign court are preferable, include the specifics in the 
Letter Rogatory (for example, verbatim transcript, place witness under oath, or permission 
for U.S. or foreign counsel to attend or participate in proceedings if possible).  
 
MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE TREATIES 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are treaties between the United States and 
foreign countries that provide for the exchange of information and documents relating to 
narcotics, money laundering, and other financial crimes.  
 
Requests for foreign assistance under Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are usually 
quicker and more efficient than filing Letters Rogatory. The procedure for making formal 
requests by MLAT is as follows: 
• No U.S. court involvement is required. 
• The prosecutor calls the OIA for guidance and will send a draft request to the OIA for 
editing. 
• When the OIA director approves the request, the OIA transmits the request to the 
foreign central or competent authority. 
• If a translation is required, the requesting agency is responsible for obtaining it. 
• The OIA transmits the translation to the requested country. 
• The requested country’s proper authority determines whether the request meets treaty 
requirements and, if it does, transmits the request to the appropriate recorder agency  
 for execution. 
• The executing authority transmits the evidence through the proper authority to the OIA, 
which forwards it to the prosecutor. 
• The fraud examiner/prosecutor should inspect the evidence for responsiveness and 
completeness, as well as certificates of authenticity of business records (notify the OIA at 
once of any problems). 
 
The United States currently has bilateral MLATs in force with the following countries: 
Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Belgium, Brazil, British Virgin Islands, Ca nada, the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Cyprus, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Czech Republic, Dominica, Egypt, Estonia, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Grenada, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, India,  Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, 
Korea, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Montserrat, Morocco, the 
Netherlands, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands, Turkey, United 
Kingdom, Uruguay, and Venezuela. 
 
Another method of obtaining foreign bank or business records is by obtaining a release and 
consent form from the defendant. Execution of such a waiver can be compelled by order of 
a U.S. court. This procedure is not universally accepted, particularly in Switzerland, the 
Channel Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands, or the Cayman Islands. 
 
Public Records 
Of course, a great deal of information that is useful in tracing illicit transactions, particularly 
real and personal property filings, is a matter of public record. For more information, see the 
“Sources of Information” and “Accessing Information Online” chapters. 
 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.901 



:


trace illicit transact
interview wit to obtain financi data involv the systemat question of peopl
who have knowledg of the event the peopl involv and the physic evid
surround the case financi interview is not unlik other kind of interview but in
financi interview evid often develop in bit and piec that when view separ
might appear to lead nowher frustrat is common and tactic and techniqu might
have to be modifi dilig patienc and persist ar essenti for success result
comprehens guidelin for inform to be collect in financi interview
the follow is a checklist of gener inform that can be cover in the financi
interview
identif
full name
alia
reason for alia
birth
date and place of birth
citizenship
father name live if deceas when
mother name live if deceas when
address dure pertin year
resid address phone number
busi address phone number
other present or prior address
marit statu if marri date and place of marriag
if divorc when and where
spous maiden name
spous parent live if deceas when
children name and ag other depend
trace illicit transact investig
3802 2011 fraud examin manual
occup
present occup
compani name and address
present salari
length of time emploi
addit employ
prior occup
spous occup
gener background
physic health
mental health
educ
profession qualif
militari servic
passport social secur andor social insur number for identif purpos
ever been investig for financi crime
ever been arrest
ever file bankruptci if so who act as receivertruste
hobbi and interest
financi institut busi and person
financi institut account
safe deposit box request inventori in whose name content doe anyon els
have access
credit card
trust beneficiari donor or truste
mutual fund or other secur own
broker currenc exchang us
life insur
indirect deal eg through lawyer or account
cashier check
monei order bank draft travel check
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3803
sourc of incom
salari wage busi receipt
interest and dividend
sale of secur
rent and royalti
pension trust annuiti etc
gift monei properti etc
inherit
loan
mortgag
sale of asset
municip bond interest
insur settlement
damag from legal action
ani other sourc of fund ever
net incom and expenditur
current cash on hand includ cash in safe deposit box but not cash in bank
account
locat of current cash
largest amount of cash ever on hand locat
endofyear cash
note receiv
mortgag receiv
life insur polici
automobil
real estat
stock bond and other secur
jewelri fur
airplan boat
ani other asset valu
liabil
payabl
loan
asset purchas by financ
trace illicit transact investig
3804 2011 fraud examin manual
mortgag
bond
expenditur
debt reduct
insur premium
interest expens
contribut
medic
travel
real estat and other tax
household wage eg babysitt housekeep garden
casualti loss
busi oper
name and address
date organ and natur corpor partnership
compani or busi registr number
tax identif number
titl and duti
report arrangementsto and from whom
bank and cash handl arrang
invest where and when
subsidiari and associ
kei peopl
book and record
natur of account system eg cash accrual
period cover
locat
name of person maintain and control
type journal ledger minut book cancel check bank statement invoic cash
extern auditor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3805
busi receipt
form electron check or cash
ar all receipt deposit where
ar busi receipt segreg from person on
ar expens ever paid with undeposit receipt
arrang for foreign currenc payment
trade financ arrang letter of credit etc
direct method of trace financi transact
a subject incom can be establish by the direct or indirect approach the direct
approach or the specificitem method of prove incom reli on specif transact
such as sale or expens to determin incom the indirect approach reli on
circumstanti proof of incom indirect method will be discuss in the next section
to trace financi transact us the direct method the examin must obtain relev
financi record
financi institut
fraud examin should recogn that in most instanc bank record ar not readili
obtain substanti requir usual must be met to justifi legal process eg
subpoena search warrant and the like which bank will customarili demand as a condit
for disclosur preliminari investig is of the utmost import to lai the basi for
obtain such record more inform on bank transact is contain in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
the avail of investig avenu often determin whether a promis fraud
examin will grind to a halt or proce successfulli legal advic from a prosecutor or
civil counsel should be sought in all such instanc it should also be recogn that bank
offici and employe can be question by fraud examin in the same manner as ani
other potenti wit and that their respons to proper inquiri might provid
import inform
bank record ar perhap the singl most import financi sourc avail to a fraud
examin in addit to their us as evid for fraud a bank record might provid lead
on sourc of fund expenditur and person affair
trace illicit transact investig
3806 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow inform can be of valu to fraud examin seek inform from
bank concern pertin financi transact of econom crime perpetr it is base
in part on the oper guidelin issu by the american banker associ to all
member bank in the unit state and on the train guid issu by the us
depart of the treasuri
type of financi institut
bank ar classifi primarili by their major servic
commerci bank offer busi and individu such servic as check account
loan and exchang instrument
save bank and save and loan associ handl save account and mortgag loan
trust compani handl properti for other under variou type of fiduciari
accommod
mani bank combin all three servic bank ar organ under either state or nation
bank law
the basic bank function ar as follow
receiv deposit
pai check
transfer fund
make loan
collect sundri financi instrument
hold and administ properti for other
perform other servic such as rent safe deposit box
intern bookkeep procedur
the intern recordkeep practic and procedur of bank not onli ar complex but
thei constantli ar chang becaus of the grow sophist of comput technolog
bank ar move steadili toward an electron fundstransf system that will elimin the
us of check such a system will automat transfer monei from the account of the
purchas to the account of the seller paper trail will disappear detail familiar with the
intricaci of intern bank oper is not essenti howev for the fraud examin to
obtain the type of inform necessari for investig what is essenti is the
knowledg that record of custom transact ar maintain and retain
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3807
electron bank
electron bank is possibl the most common form of bank todai electron bank
includ autom teller machin transact pointofsal transact us credit or
debit card smart card which ar gain popular in the us and ar alreadi popular in
europ wire transfer onlin bill payment through internet bank and biller websit
and tradit autom clear hous ach applic of direct payment and direct
deposit
all of these form of electron bank ar govern by the electron fund transfer act
efta 15 usc 1693 see appendix a the efta current requir financi
institut to keep record on all transact of 3000 or more
retent of record
the bank secreci act set forth a system of report and recordkeep requir
design to help track larg or unusu financi transact the act consist of two titl
titl i contain provis requir financi institut and secur broker and dealer
to keep extens record of the transact and account of their custom titl ii of the
act origin entitl currenc and foreign transact report act requir bank
financi institut which includ casino secur broker and dealer currenc
exchang and other and in some case individu to report certain transact to the
govern
titl irecordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c the recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang under these regul all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani
financi transact of more than 10000
these regul provid in part that bank must keep an origin microfilm or other
copi or reproduct of most demand deposit check account and save account
record must be retain for five year the record must includ signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw and copi of custom check s bank draft monei order and cashier
check drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
trace illicit transact investig
3808 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a
custom check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit
ticket thei must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check
deposit to a custom check account
although some of these requir appli to check written or deposit made in excess of
100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all pertin record includ the check and
deposit in amount less than 100 rather than sort their record into two categori the
bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a record of ani extens of
credit of more than 10000 as well as each tr ansfer of 10000 or more outsid the unit
state
titl iireport and recordkeep
titl ii of the bank secreci act is codifi as 31 usc 53115330 the purpos of
these section is to requir certain report or record to be file or kept by financi
institut section 5312a2 defin financi institut veri broadli to includ not
onli bank but also secur broker curr ncy exchang hous insur compani loan
compani travel agenc telegraph compani s issuer or cashier of check or monei
order auto boat and airplan dealer casino and person involv in real estat close
and settlement onli recent ha the treasuri depart begun to reign in much of the
nonfinanci institut transact busi in the by requir registr of these divers
enterpris
gain access to record held by financi institut
on of the most difficult challeng to the fraud examin will be to gain access to the
record held by financi institut although bank record ar on of the most import
sourc avail to fraud examin thei ar not readili obtain most suspect will
not willingli give their record to a fraud examin especi if the record contain
potenti incrimin evid
moreov financi institut author to di sclose bank record is restrict by feder
and state law for exampl the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut
from disclos financi inform about individu custom until the government
author obtain the custom consent a court order a subpoena a search warrant or
some other formal demand with limit except and even though right to financi
privaci act appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and other
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3809
financi institut also will not releas such inform to privat parti absent legal
process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
as a result substanti requir must gener be met befor bank will disclos such
inform in gener bank record can be obtain in most jurisdict by us on of
the follow method
civil discoveri
administr subpoena or summon
civil summon
custom author disclosur
court subpoena
grand juri subpoena
search warrant
furthermor the cost of obtain bank record can be quit high bank gener charg
both public and privat entiti to search and retriev record there ar usual addit
cost for the reproduct of record it might be prudent for the examin to limit record
request as much as possibl
despit such complic the examin might attempt to obtain the financi record of
suspect by contact their former spous former spous might have bank record
us to the fraud examin that thei mai be happi to turn over similarli the bank
record might also be a part of a divorc settlement or a lawsuit
type of financi record
the financi record identifi and discuss below ar limit to those of particular
interest to fraud examin
account open document
account open document includ the record requir to creat a bank account but the
type of file requir mai vari depend on the type of account
person account
signatur card ar the kei record requir to open and us a person account the
signatur card is the evid of a contract between the custom and bank when a
depositor open an account the bank requir that a signatur card be sign by sign the
trace illicit transact investig
3810 2011 fraud examin manual
card the depositor becom a parti to a contract with the bank under which he accept all
rule and regul of the bank and author the bank to honor hi order for
withdraw fund for a corpor or a partnership account the signatur card is
accompani by copi of resolut of the board of director or partnership agreement
name the person author to draw check on the account
the signatur card is a sourc of valuabl inform although it form vari the card
usual contain such data as bank connect and the date and amount of the initi
deposit the initi deposit trace through the bank record mai disclos a sourc of
incom the identif of the person who open the account might be signific
especi if the depositor us an alia
mani bank investig the refer give n by a new custom thei might also make
inquiri of variou credit report agenc thi inform is contain in a
correspond file or a credit file that can contain comment of the person who open the
account and might show inform given by the depositor when open the account
in bank us automat data process adp the signatur card also contain an
account number assign to the custom in trace inform about a subject
transact with the bank the account number must be us if it doe not appear on the
signatur card it can be locat in the bank crossrefer file assign account number
ar encod on other document relat to the depositor by mean of a system call
magnet ink charact recognit micr the card also might contain the depositor
social secur number
the signatur card might defin the account as either a regular or a special check account
the main differ between the two is the servic charg made by the bank the regular
check account is us mostli by busi and individu who maintain larg averag
balanc the special check account is us by individu who usual have small
account balanc
when request the signatur card the fraud examin should determin whether the bank
maintain ani type of central file most larg bank have a central file that list all
depart with which a custom ha had deal if the bank ha such a file the
examin doe not need to check with each depart to obtain inform the subject
might at on time have had a bank account that later wa close request for inform
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3811
from a bank about a subject should alwai includ a refer to both activ and close
account record of close account ar usual maintain in a separ file
in addit to a signatur card the accountopen file for a person account might
contain a copi of some form of identif eg driver licens the account holder
provid the bank
busi account
in addit to the document requir for open a person account the open
document for a corpor account will includ a copi of the corpor resolut
author the open of a bank account and possibl the compani articl of
incorpor these document should indic who the compani corpor offic ar
and it date of incorpor
for an unincorpor compani to open a bank account the bake institut might
requir the compani to provid a do busi as dba registr fictiti name
registr or busi registr certif gener the requir document
depend on the applic state law
negoti check
cancel check written by a subject or receiv from other provid the fraud examin
with much more than amount paye and endorse of particular interest ar check that
have been cash all bank us a seri of code or symbol imprint on the front of a
check to show that the check ha been cash the specif code us in variou area can
be obtain local
a us techniqu to help examin negoti check is to list the inform from the
check on a spreadsheet either manual or electron check should be list by number
and date on the left with the paye amount and purpos of the check if known to the
right thi will show the subject routin monthli or annual expenditur that can be us
for comput the compar net worth the absenc of a check for a recur payment
for a particular month might indic a cash payment which in turn would indic possibl
undisclos cash incom examin the back of check payabl to cash and note where thei
were cash the depositori stamp can identifi the bank at which the check wa cash
thi inform mai provid a lead to anoth bank account
trace illicit transact investig
3812 2011 fraud examin manual
check 21
with imag exchang and the emerg fraud detect technolog bank will be abl to
know if suffici fund ar in the account whether the custom is who he claim to be
and whether the check is legitim 6
in juli 2003 congress issu final regul regard the avail of fund and
collect of check these regul known as check 21 creat substitut check a
type of negoti instrument that becam the legal equival of paper check thi
provis facilit the effici collect and return of check in electron form by
allevi the collect requir that depositori bank actual send the origin paper
check to collect bank for payment
under check 21 a depositori bank can transfer check inform electron to a
collect bank via a substitut check for present the collect bank is then requir
to take present of the substitut check as long as it meet all the legal requir of
the origin check therefor rather than actual process and send an origin
paper check across citi and state the deposit bank can now collect the substitut
check electron
a substitut check is a paper reproduct of the origin check that state thi is a legal
copi of your check you can us it the same wai you would us the origin check upon
transfer present or return a bank warrant that the substitut check submit is an
accur depict of the physic check and that no depositori bank drawe drawer or
endors will be ask or requir to pai a check that ha alreadi been paid essenti thi
legend on the substitut check inform consum of their right to expedit recredit of
an amount charg if there is a disput item and the origin or substitut copi is
necessari to prove the valid of the charg on the account under thi law the valid of a
charg becom an issu when a consum is charg twice for a check the substitut check
is illeg or the origin check wa not properli copi dure the imag process
furthermor check 21 place the risk of loss associ with substitut check on the
reconvert bank that first transfer present or return the substitut check
6 robertson bill and ken gahr whitecollar crime fighter vol 6 no 1 check 21 blackjack for check fraud
fighter ridgefield ct white collar crime101 llc 2004
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3813
although the reconvert bank can alloc such loss among themselv thei mai remain
liabl under warranti claim indemn or recredit claim
trace check
trace check is facilit by the us of bank identif symbol fraud examin do
not have to understand the intern bookkeep procedur us by bank the concept of
bank identif symbol howev is of interest all check print for bank
institut contain an aba transit number these number repres an identif code
develop by the american banker associ the aba transit number enabl a check
to be rout to the bank of origin in the process of rout a trail is left
magnet ink charact recognit
magnet ink charact recognit micr is a machin languag and is a check design
standard to which all bank must conform numer inform is print in magnet ink
on the bottom of bank check and other document thi code is electron scan by
comput that convert the magnet ink notat into electron impuls readabl by a
comput micr inform is print in group call field the first field on the left
on bank check is the feder reserv check rout code and the next is the aba transit
number these number also appear in the upper right corner of the check
the account number field show the drawer assign account number at the bank when
the check is process through the bank an addit field is ad on the right for the
amount of the check the dollar amount of the check should alwai equal the encod
micr amount these two figur should be compar to make sure that the subject did not
alter the return check all check draft and similar item that ar not encod with
magnet ink cannot be clear through the feder reserv system without special handl
prefix number of citi in numer order
when the aba establish the citi and state prefix number system it did so by the
geograph locat of the reserv citi in exist at the time the prefix number
identifi citi and state document for exampl number 1 through 49 as seen in the
follow exampl were given to the most popul reserv citi and major bank
center at the time the rest of the number 50 through 99 were assign to the state from
east to west the princip number 50 60 70 80 and 90 were given to the main collect
financi center new york pennsylvania illi noi missouri and california the number
befor and after each princip number were gener design to nearbi state
trace illicit transact investig
3814 2011 fraud examin manual
prefix number of citi and state
149 reserv citi
5099 state
5058 eastern state
59 alaska american samoa guam hawaii puerto rico and the virgin island
6069 southeastern state
7079 central state
8088 southwestern state
9099 western state
reserv citi major bank center and state prefix number
1 new york ny 34 tacoma wa 68 virginia
2 chicago il 35 houston tx 69 west virginia
3 philadelphia pa 36 st joseph mo 70 illinoi
4 st loui mo 37 fort worth tx 71 indiana
5 boston ma 38 savannah ga 72 iowa
6 cleveland oh 39 oklahoma citi ok 73 kentucki
7 baltimor md 40 wichita ks 74 michigan
8 pittsburgh pa 41 sioux citi ia 75 minnesota
9 detroit mi 43 lincoln ne 76 nebraska
10 buffalo ny 44 topeka ks 77 north dakota
11 san francisco ca 45 dubuqu ia 78 south dakota
12 milwauke wi 46 galveston tx 79 wisconsin
13 cincinnati oh 47 cedar rapid ia 80 missouri
14 new orlean la 48 waco tx 81 arkansa
15 washington dc 49 muskoge ok 82 colorado
16 lo angel ca 50 new york 83 kansa
17 minneapoli mn 51 connecticut 84 louisiana
18 kansa citi mo 52 main 85 mississippi
19 seattl wa 53 massachusett 86 oklahoma
20 indianapoli in 54 new hampshir 87 tennesse
21 louisvil ky 55 new jersei 88 texa
22 st paul mn 56 ohio 89
23 denver co 57 rhode island 90 california
24 portland or 58 vermont 91 arizona
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3815
25 columbu oh 59 al as gu hi pr vi 7 92 idaho
26 memphi tn 60 pennsylvania 93 montana
27 omaha ne 61 alabama 94 nevada
28 spokan wa 62 delawar 95 new mexico
29 albani ny 63 florida 96 oregon
30 san antonio tx 64 georgia 97 utah
31 salt lake citi ut 65 maryland 98 washington
32 dalla tx 66 north carolina 99 wyom
all bank in an area serv by a feder reserv bank or branch carri the rout symbol of
the feder reserv bank or branch the feder reserv rout symbol frr
encompass the first four digit of the ninedigit rout number thi rout symbol
identifi where the feder reserv bank is locat the first two number of the frr
design the feder reserv district in which the bank is locat as shown below the 12
feder reserv district and number ar as follow
01boston ma
02new york ny
03philadelphia pa
04cleveland oh
05richmond va
06atlanta ga
07chicago il
08st loui mo
09minneapoli mn
10kansa citi ks
11dalla tx
12san francisco ca
the next two number design the specif bank locat of the feder reserv branch a
thrift institut is design when 2 is ad to the first digit of the frr for exampl
if there is a thrift institut in the first district boston the design would be 21 if
the thrift institut is in a district that ha a doubl digit such as san francisco the
design becom 32 the next four number of the rout number sequenc ar
7 al alaska as american samoa gu guam hi hawaii pr puerto rico vi virgin island
trace illicit transact investig
3816 2011 fraud examin manual
alwai uniqu to the financi institut and the last number of the nine digit rout
number is a digit deriv from an algorithm calcul
deposit ticket
the deposit ticket is the princip sourc document for credit the custom account
deposit ar first record on the deposit ticket or slip that usual segreg currenc
coin and check the check ar list separ in mani local the depositor write
the aba number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket either of
these might help to identifi the sourc of the check in other local the bank write the
aba number on the deposit ticket and in some bank no identifi data is enter on the
deposit ticket regardless of the detail contain on a deposit ticket bank recordkeep
system allow deposit to be identifi and trace to their sourc
in work with deposit ticket the fraud examin must rememb that sometim the
depositor split the deposit mean onli part of the check is actual deposit in these
instanc the custom either receiv cash or request that part of the proce be appli
to a note or interest due to the bank in some instanc it might be import to determin
the total amount of cash and check present for deposit befor deduct when thi is
the case the fraud examin should inquir from the bank how split deposit ar handl
deposit item can be broken down into two type onu item and clearinghous item
onu item
an onu item is a check or draft that is present for payment where the depositori bank is
also the payor bank for exampl a check written by a custom of on bank is deposit by
the paye at anoth branch of the same bank the bank should be abl to trace the sourc
of ani onu item the sourc might be loan proce certif of deposit wire transfer
bank check or check from other deposit at that bank if the deposit is the proce from
a loan obtain and analyz the loan file examin of the loan file is discuss later in thi
chapter if the deposit came from a wire transfer trace the wire transfer to the origin
bank to see where the fund for the wire transfer origin thi search could lead to other
account other wit coconspir or offshor transact
bank check such as cashier check and monei order could be an indic of smurf
oper smurf is the process by which a subject structur a deposit into sever
transact each less than 10000 to avoid file a currenc transact report as requir
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3817
under the bank secreci act as the video portion of thi cours make clear smurf is a
veri common techniqu for avoid report requir look for larg number of
cashier check in even amount deposit on a regular basi
clearinghous item
clearinghous item ar those that must clear through other local bank and ar therefor sent
to a local clearinghous for process and thei includ those item that ar sent to outof
town bank such as feder reserv bank becaus track down these item will involv
obtain record from thirdparti bank the trace process might be more time
consum and will probabl requir legal process
to determin whether an item is an onu item or a clearinghous item first look to see
whether the bank on which the check wa drawn is the same as the bank in which it wa
deposit if the name ar not the same check the endors on the back of the check
if the item ha a differ bank endors or a feder reserv bank endors it is
a clearinghous item the endors should contain the name of the process bank or
it transit number
wire transfer
a wire transfer is a method of transfer monei from on bank to anoth these transfer
ar process by bank and by wire remitt compani such as western union and
moneygram
like other transact bank keep record of wire transfer the record will identifi who
sent the wire where it wa sent the date and the amount if the transfer wa to a bank in
the unit state the bank should have a record of the account number of the account into
which the fund were deposit if the wire wa sent offshor howev trace the transfer
depend on the law and polici of the countri and the receiv institut
intrabank transfer
other depart within a bank can credit the depositor account for fund collect such
as the proce of loan or item held by the bank for collect item held by the bank for
collect ar not alwai deposit to the custom account but ar sometim remit
directli to the custom
trace illicit transact investig
3818 2011 fraud examin manual
save account
these ar refer to as time deposit becaus sometim thei ar not as readili avail to the
custom as deposit to a check account fund in a save account might be subject to a
30dai notic of withdraw
certif of deposit
certif of deposit cd ar interest bear invest product that provid limit access
to the monei invest and a modest rate of interest cd ar intend to be held until
matur at which time the monei mai be withdrawn togeth with the accru interest
mani bank impos penalti on monei with drawn from a cd befor matur
bank statement
a bank statement is a summari of all the transact of a bank account bank statement
ar provid for all type of bank account includ check account monei market
account save account cap account us by those who often deal in secur
transact and other
bank statement ar help becaus thei contain import inform in gener the
detail on a bank statement includ the name and address of the bank the name and address
of the account holder the account number the open balanc a record of all debit
transact eg cash withdraw from a teller automatedtel machin atm cash
withdraw atm payment check payment onlin payment debit card payment bank
fee etc a record of all credit transact eg direct transfer cash deposit check
deposit etc and the close balanc
bank statement summar the financi activ of the account holder for a specif period
usual a month if a credit card is ti to the account the bank statement also reflect
credit card balanc but usual not specif transact
todai bank statement ar mail to account holder or ar access onlin some bank
still return origin check along with the bank statement to the account holder other
provid page with smaller facsimil of the front and back of each check
gener bank statement contain a wealth of inform in most bank statement
financi activ in the account is shown along with a ti credit card balanc typic
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3819
bank statement show numer type of transact includ check electron check
and electron fund transfer as thei ar charg against the account
other exchang instrument
exchang instrument ar vehicl by which the bank transfer fund and these instrument
includ cashier check bank draft travel s check bank monei order and certifi
check bank exchang instrument ar often purchas with currenc therefor thei mai
be good sourc of inform about a subject currenc transact
cashier check
cashier check ar issu and certifi by a bank with itself as the drawer these item ar
call treasur check when issu by a trust compani thei ar frequent an excel
lead to other bank account stock real properti and other asset becaus cashier check
can be held indefinit subject sometim purchas cashier check instead of keep
larg amount of currenc on hand in reconstruct a subject transact with cashier
check be sure that all check ar account for becaus subject sometim exchang
previous purchas check for new on
bank check such as cashier check can be extrem time consum and expens to
locat unless you know the date and number of the check howev if the subject ha
deposit a bank check into hi account or purchas a bank check us a check from hi
account then copi of bank check ar much easier to obtain becaus the subject account
record will reveal the date and number of the bank check
bank draft
bank draft ar check drawn by the issu bank on it account with anoth bank often
thi other account is in the geograph area where the purchas desir to make a
payment bank draft also can be us when a subject doe not want to carri a larg amount
of cash
travel check
travel check ar check issu in predetermin amount by the american express
compani and sever larg us bank local bank purchas them from issu compani
of us bank and then sell them to the public travel check requir two signatur of
the purchas on when purchas and the other when cash travel check ar trace
trace illicit transact investig
3820 2011 fraud examin manual
by their serial number the issu compani usual keep record of travel check sent
to it by the sell bank travel check do not expir
the local bank that sold the check might keep a copi of the sale order that list the serial
number if the number ar not avail the issu bank might be abl to suppli the
inform if it is known when the check were purchas cancel check can be
obtain from the american express compani or from other issu bank a target can
purchas larg amount of travel check from on bank and place them in anoth to
avoid arous suspicion by deposit cash
it is import to note howev that travel check ar declin in us accord to the
feder reserv usag of travel check ha declin each year sinc their peak in the mid
1990
bank monei order
bank monei order ar similar to cashier check but usual ar for small amount like
cashier check monei order mai be resort to by subject reluct to us cash
certifi check
certifi check ar custom check stamp with the pai bank guarante that the
maker signatur is genuin and that there is enough monei avail in the holder account
to cover the amount to be paid certifi check ar liabil of the bank and when paid
ar kept by the bank these check ar immedi charg against the custom account
by debit memorandum some bank permit custom to retriev the origin check by
surrend the debit memorandum
loan record
loan record can provid import inform regard a subject with loan record the
collater that secur them and the result of bank credit investig a bank ha a
wealth of inform when a bank make a commerci loan to an individu it requir
detail statement of asset and liabil from the borrow the loan file also might
includ the result of credit inquiri regard pai habit loan amount and present
unpaid balanc a bank credit depart gener maintain the follow basic record
the credit or loan file thi file includ the loan applic financi statement and
gener econom histori of the custom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3821
the liabil ledger thi contain the custom past and present liabil to the bank
these sheet also contain inform such as the loan date note number amount of the
loan interest rate due date and payment
the collater file a complet descript of the item pledg as secur for loan
record of such collater can provid valuabl inform about a subject asset
indic of unusu loan includ loan in odd amount or loan that were not deposit
into the subject bank account loan that show unusu repay also should be trace
lumpsum payment and oddamount payment ar unusu acceler payment or larg
paydown on the balanc might indic sudden wealth
loan record also might reveal collus between the bank and the subject for instanc if
the record show that a loan repay is long overdu or the loan ha an extend rollov
collus might exist also loan made in contravent to the bank normal loan or a loan
that appear to be in excess of the individu abil to repai suggest a special
relationship between the bank and the subject
loan proce might be deposit into hidden account or hidden account might be us
for loan payment loan might be secur by hidden asset or cosign by previous
unknown cohort altern the subject might have taken out the loan for someon els
trace the ultim disposit of the proce will uncov those lead
trace the disposit of loan proce is similar to trace deposit transact the
proce could have been deposit within the bank into the subject account or someon
els account or thei might be us to purchas a certif of deposit the fund might
have been sent to the wire transfer depart for transmitt to anoth bank more
commonli the proce will be given to the custom in the form of a bank check the
bank should be abl to trace the check to determin where it wa deposit or cash the
loan proce might have been us to financ an asset the down payment for which came
from illeg fund trace the sourc of loan payment will provid some lead for instanc
the payment might be made from a previous unknown account payment made by a
thirdparti might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme
the loan applic should contain a financi statement or it equival on which the
subject mai identifi other account and asset the file might also contain tax return credit
trace illicit transact investig
3822 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc report and note of interview by the loan offic the secur for the loan if ani
might be a hidden asset
mortgag loan file
mortgag loan file often contain the most detail financi statement submit by the
subject the loan file should identifi the titl compani that handl the close the
homeown insur carrier the close attornei and perhap the real estat broker the
titl compani file often contain copi of the cashier check us for the down payment
which can identifi new account
the homeown insur polici might contain a rider that list the homeown valuabl
asset such as jewelri or fur perhap with apprais and purchas receipt the close
attornei will have mani of the same materi found in the titl compani file the real
estat broker might keep copi of person check us for deposit and provid
inform about other real estat transact by the subject dont forget to look for
acceler or lump sum payment on the mortgag balanc
check credit loan
check credit is anoth loan servic that more and more bank ar offer under a check
credit plan the bank agre to extend credit to a custom up to a maximum amount if the
amount of the check is not in the custom a ccount the result overdraft is set up as a
loan the bank then bill the custom for the loan anoth plan is a special check
account that is us onli up to a predetermin amount under a loan agreement the
outstand balanc is treat as an instal loan by the bank copi of loan agreement
and statement under both plan can be obtain from the bank file
credit card record
bank ar increasingli do busi in credit card under bank credit card plan the
cardhold can charg purchas at store restaur and other place that agre to accept
the charg under most plan the cardhold can elect to pai the entir balanc in on
payment or to pai in instal under arrang similar to a loan account
the credit card record that ar import to the econom crime investig ar the
applic for a card and the bank copi of monthli statement sent to the cardhold
credit card applic requir a consider amount of financi inform and some of
the inform mai be the same as that found on an applic for a bank loan in todai
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3823
environ credit card mai be ti to bank account and mai not requir a separ
applic
credit card statement also contain a great deal of import inform gener these
statement contain the name of the credit card issuer the cardhold account number a
summari of the transact on the account payment inform and a list of all the
transact that occur dure that month bill cycl ie purchas payment credit
cash advanc and balanc transfer
bank collect depart record
the bank collect depart which is normal involv in collect amount due on
instal contract and note can be us to collect person check usual in larg
amount and with special instruct thu circumv the normal recordkeep
associ with check account such a transact will not be reflect on the target
regular check account statement but will appear in the collect depart record a
copi of the check also will be microfilm
safedeposit box record
safedeposit box ar privat vault space rent by bank to custom becaus state law
differ the natur of the relationship vari between a bank and the safedeposit box holder
bank keep no record of safedeposit box content and rare know what the box contain
the rental contract record identifi the renter the person or peopl who have access to the
box their signatur and the date of the origin agreement and later renew thei also
might contain other identifi inform includ the name of the initi bank
offic the offic name could be signific if the subject who might have us an alia
in rent the box must be identifi
record show access to the box vari from bank to bank but gener thei contain the
signatur of the peopl enter the box and usual the date and time of entri the
entri record ar file in boxnumb order the frequenc of entri and the time and date
of entri might be signific and might correspond to the time and date of deposit or
withdraw from other account or to the purchas and sale of secur properti and in
other situat
becaus the bank record will not show the content of the box the fraud examin can
request permiss to inventori the box with the target present carefulli note and
trace illicit transact investig
3824 2011 fraud examin manual
describ the exact content for exampl legal descript on deed number of insur
polici etc
bank secreci act document
under the bank secreci act bank and other financi institut ar requir to file
currenc transact report suspici activ report and other report detail larg
cash transact or suspici activ see the chapter on monei launder in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual for a complet descript of
each report these report will reflect the ident address and social secur number of
the person make the cash transact total amount and certain other inform some
organ ar exempt from the file requir includ certain highvolum cash
busi government agenc and payrol account holder
stock brokerag record
mani stock brokerag hous now offer the same type of servic as bank such as check
write privileg credit card loan against the valu of secur held as well as their
normal secur busi all record pertain to the subject should be request
howev make sure that the request specif includ the follow
applic when a custom open an account he typic will fill out an account
applic that will contain person and financi data such as bank account
custom account card thi card is kept in the broker file for refer it will includ all
transact conduct for the custom
signatur card a signatur card should be on file which will show all those author to
conduct transact on the account
secur receipt these receipt ar issu to a custom when he deliv secur to the
broker for sale
cash receipt these receipt ar issu to a custom when he deliv currenc to the
broker
confirm slip these ar issu to a custom to show the type of transact bui or
sell and the amount involv in the transact
secur deliv receipt thi receipt is sign by the custom when a secur purchas
is deliv to the custom
brokerag account statement thi statement is usual issu monthli and provid
inform on all transact conduct dure the report period it list all
purchas and sale the name of the secur the number of unit the amount per unit
the total amount of the transact the account balanc payment receiv from the
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3825
custom disburs to the custom and the secur that ar held by the
brokerag firm for the custom
concern stock brokerag record the examin is primarili interest in the sourc of the
fund us to purchas secur or deposit to a cash account the subject monthli
account statement which ar somewhat more complex than equival bank statement
reflect these transact thei can be interpret with the help of explanatori materi on
the statement or with the assist of an employe of the firm receipt for stock purchas
and deposit should reflect whether the payment wa in currenc or check and the aba
code of the bank on which the check wa drawn brokerag check issu to the subject
from stock sale proce also should be examin as these might be deposit directli to a
new account or endors over and paid directli to third parti for the purchas of asset
tax return and relat document
person tax return if avail might provid indirect evid of illicit payment such as
profit or loss from previous undisclos busi ventur or interest and dividend on
hidden cd and bank account the return might also reveal deduct and expens
such as real estat tax that can lead to previous unknown fund or asset commerci
bribe ar often report as consult fee or other miscellan incom the target
account and tax prepar should also be interview and their file and work paper
subpoena if possibl
establish a databas
after obtain the relev financi record the examin should establish a databas or
spreadsheet for analysi by place the record into a standard format the fraud
examin will be more easili abl to compar record uncov pattern and extract variou
represent of the data
both spreadsheet and databas have benefit and drawback the benefit of us
spreadsheet includ 1 most individu who work in the financi sector ar familiar with
spreadsheet 2 spreadsheet allow data to be translat easili into bar pie and other
graphic chart 3 thei allow data to be filter and sort easili 4 and spreadsheet allow
for the us of pivot tabl to displai data spreadsheet howev ar restrict to a limit
number of record and mai requir a larg amount of harddriv space for data storag
trace illicit transact investig
3826 2011 fraud examin manual
convers databas ar more effect than spreadsheet when deal with larg set of
record databas offer the follow featur 1 data can be sort and manipul
easili 2 chang to record can automat updat queri and report and 3 relat
tabl and form can be us to reduc data entri time in some environ such as
microsoft offic data can be easili switch from a spreadsheet to a databas and vice
versa for eas of manipul or displai
regardless of the type of program us the inform us is the same the type of
inform retriev from financi record is the data enter into the spreadsheet or
databas each column or field hold some type of inform and thi inform form
the basi for the column us as illustr in the tabl below there ar 16 primari
element that can be pull from bank record an addit field for comment is ad
for miscellan data
1 check number 9 signatori
2 entiti from 10 account number from
3 bank from 11 transact type
4 date written 12 first endors
5 paye 13 transact bank
6 amount written 14 deposit to account
7 amount deposit 15 date of transact
8 memo written 16 comment
17 locat
detail on what goe into each of these field ar provid below
1 check number thi field should contain the number of the financi instrument written on
or deposit to the account the follow item howev will not contain a check
number wire transact autom teller machin transact pointofsal
transact and debit memo a deposit amount would includ a check number unless
the deposit wa cash an incom wire or a credit memo
2 entiti from thi field should contain the name of the compani or person the check is
fromth owner of the account on which the check is written
3 bank from thi field should contain the name of the bank from which the check debit
memo or wire transfer wa issu if desir the aba bank number can also be enter
to identifi the bank sourc of the fund
4 date written thi field should contain the date the check wa written the transact
eg wire transfer or debit memo wa gener or the withdraw wa made thi is
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3827
not the date shown on the bank statement bank statement show the clear date
the date that check clear the bank the clear date can be us if no other date ar
present eg if there is no check copi provid by the bank but the check is list on
the statement
5 paye thi field should contain the name of the payeeth person or entiti to whom
the check wa written
6 amount written thi field should contain the amount written on the face of the check if
there is a discrep between the numer and written amount the bank will usual
honor the written amount check the amount the bank ha imprint on the bottom
righthand side of the check in magnet ink charact recognit micr to determin
which amount the bank us
7 deposit amount thi field should contain the amount of monei credit to the bank
account by a cash or check deposit wire transfer or credit memo thi amount is put
into a field separ from the amount written for eas of separ sort and ad
the amount
8 memo thi field should contain ani notat written on the memo line or box on the
check
9 signatori thi field should contain the name of the person or person who sign the
check as the author signatori when enter the data into thi field initi ar
suffici if the person referenc is clear
10 account number from thi field should contain the account number on which the check
debit memo or wire transfer wa written
11 transact type thi field should contain the type of transact eg check transfer
wire debit memo credit memo deposit atm deposit or withdraw or atm
purchas
12 first endors thi field should contain the name of the first endors the first endors
is the person or person who endors the check ie sign the check on the back as
the endors on check made out to a compani the back of the check mai be
stamp with the compani name bank and account number and no endors signatur
should be shown
13 transact bank thi field should contain the name of the bank the item wa deposit
to or where the check wa cash thi could be the bank from which record have
been subpoena the bank stamp on the back of the check or the bank at which the
check wa cash if the check wa negoti at a nonbank financi institut eg
check cash agenc monei transmitt or casino the name of that compani can be
place here with other specif enter in the comment field
14 deposit to account thi field should contain the account number to which the check wa
deposit it should be note that some bank write the account number on the back of
trace illicit transact investig
3828 2011 fraud examin manual
check when cash thi serv as an identifi for the check casher therefor a bank
account number locat on the back of a check mai not mean that the check wa
deposit into that account rememb to check the front of the check for a cash
stamp
15 date of transact thi field should contain the date the check wa deposit or
negoti
16 comment the comment field is us for other comment about the transact nsf
could be enter into the comment field to signifi that there were nonsuffici fund
to cover the check addit inform about the endors eg driver licens or
alien registr number the name of a secondari endors or note written on the
back of the check by the teller could also be place in the comment field
1 7 locat thi field should be us for transact made at an autom teller machin
or a pointofsal if the locat is import
there ar three rule to follow when enter record into a spreadsheet or databas
enter data as fulli as possibl
be consist in refer to entiti
have all record review for accuraci
enter the data complet will help avoid have to enter data into the record a second
time in the past some user of financi record enter the check and deposit data locat
on the statement first and then enter the inform from cancel check as the
check were obtain thi howev should not be done although transact that ar
found onli on statement can be enter into the databas check and deposit data should be
enter from the check written and deposit slip
when input data consist is import even if check writer have not been
consist in their spell or us of name the enter data must be consist otherwis
the sort result will not be accur if for exampl a differ version of a name is us
the variou name can be place in the comment field
final all record enter should be doubl or triplecheck for accuraci it is prefer
that the review is conduct by someon who did not enter the data becaus it is hard to
catch on own error for exampl on wai to check the amount in a field is by ty
them to the total on the statement
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3829
indirect method of trace financi transact
in contrast to the direct approach method of prove incom which reli on specif
transact the indirect approach reli on circumstanti proof of incom us such as the
net worth analysi
almost all individu and busi entiti determin incom by the specificitem or
specif transact method most entiti engag in legitim pursuit maintain book
and record in which thei record transact as thei occur and their incom comput
ar base upon the total transact dure a given period in fraud examin incom
can usual be establish more readili by the direct approach for thi reason it should be
us whenev possibl
in mani fraud scheme howev a subject book and record ar not made avail to
the examin therefor an indirect approach must be taken us on of the follow
method the net worth analysi asset method the expenditur sourc and applic of
fund method or the bank deposit analysi method although these method ar
circumstanti proof court have approv their us in civil and crimin case on the theori
that proof of a subject unexplain fund or properti might establish a prima faci
understat of incom
element of financi examin techniqu
to examin compani book and record for fraud the fraud examin must know and
understand the environ in which the entiti oper the entiti account system
includ the type of scheme relev to the entiti and the control that ar design to
prevent fraud basic conceal method and variou detect techniqu
the environ
it is critic to understand the busi or govern environ where the entiti
oper to understand the environ you must have a firm grasp of the natur of the
busi the competit the market share the financ structur the vendor supplier
major custom the method of receipt ie cash or on account and disburs the
procur method ie whether good and servic ar obtain through a bid
process or not the gener econom climat and the personnel pool avail to the entiti
it is through the understand of the entiti as an oper enterpris that you can assess
the risk associ with the particular oper the risk and peculiar of the entiti
trace illicit transact investig
3830 2011 fraud examin manual
will help shape the natur of potenti fraud scheme that can be perpetr by the entiti
employe
the account system
understand the basic account system and it integr with the oper of the
busi is import the basic account system includ the system of intern
control is the kei element in provid evid of past present and futur intern fraud
intern fraud that is onbook will appear within the entiti financi record the audit trail
might be obscur but it will exist nonetheless if the intern fraud is offbook then other
evid might with dilig fraud examin techniqu be uncov
all intern fraud ha an impact on the bottom line howev fraud in small amount will be
harder to detect becaus of it immateri amount rel to the financi statement as a
whole if an intern fraud scheme is larg enough it will have an effect on the entiti
financi statement
variou detect techniqu
though there ar mani fraud detect method whatev method is emploi will usual
requir the examin of sourc document mani time these sourc document provid
the evid necessari to prove fraud in a court of law addition in mani case the
sourc document will help establish the intent of the fraud offend
individu or group of document can be examin in sever wai to detect possibl fraud
becaus most intern fraud is continu in natur group of document can be analyz
for except and trend mani time a larg popul must be sampl to determin
with statist valid if document have been alter statist sampl quantifi the risk
of arriv at an incorrect conclus it is gener necessari with larg popul
exampl
fraud examin want to examin sale invoic for proper approv in a compani with 2
billion in annual sale the averag sale inv oic is 15000 by select a valid statist
sampl of sale the examin can project the effect of intern control regard the
approv of the sale invoic assum proper interpret of test result if defici exist
in the control then those result should becom appar in the test result
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3831
statist sampl
if an anomali is found in the financi statement and transact and further investig
is desir it might be appropri to pull a statist sampl by us statist sampl
the examin can look at fewer transact rather than the entir popul
there ar two basic risk associ with statist sampl sampl risk and nonsampl
risk sampl risk is the probabl that the sampl is not repres of the popul
nonsampl risk is the possibl of make the wrong decis nonsampl risk cannot be
quantifi howev fraud examin can control it through adequ plan and
supervis of audit engag
when us statist sampl you must draw a random sampl that is each member of
the popul must have an equal chanc of be select there ar two primari type of
statist sampl attribut and discoveri
sampl for attribut
sampl for attribut is us by auditor or fraud examin look for a deviat
occurr rate deviat error and except ar synonym when perform thi type of
sampl you ar look for the presenc or absenc of a defin condit
exampl
for each sale invoic in the sampl is there a correspond ship order the answer to the
question can onli be ye or no if the control condit is that each sale invoic is not
record until there ha been a ship order attach then ani no respons for a book
sale would repres an error
discoveri sampl
thi is the best type of sampl for audit for fraud becaus it is sampl until on
occurr is found discoveri sampl deal with the probabl of discov at least
on error in a given sampl size if the popul error is a certain percentag thi type of
sampl is direct toward a specif object such as
exampl
if i believ some kind of error or irregular might exist in the record what sampl size will i have to
audit to have assur of find at least on exampl
trace illicit transact investig
3832 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri sampl is best us when look for thing such as forg check or
intercompani sale that have been improperli classifi as sale to outsid
random sampl
when us the discoverysampl techniqu the select of sampl should be done
randomli for a sampl to be random everi member of the popul must have an equal
opportun of be select
item in the popul can be number and select by refer to a random number
tabl or if the item in the popul alreadi have number such as check number or
invoic number then a random sampl can be select by us a random number
gener from a comput softwar program to select a random sampl 1 identifi a
number for everi item in the popul 2 correspond the random number with each
item in the popul 3 select the rout through the random number tabl and 4 select
the sampl
addition make sure that you consist follow the pattern pick for correspond
random number to item in the popul and that you document the random number
select process in the event the sampl need recheck or addit sampl item need
to be select for test if the sampl is select randomli and the sampl is larg enough
then the sampl should repres the popul
document
fraud will often be conceal in question document miss or alter document ar
some of the princip indic of fraud and such occurr should be thoroughli
investig certain document ar a natur part of the account system howev when
a pattern of these document occur or an unusu quantiti of these document is note
further examin might be warrant
the commonsens test should be appli to ani document that appear to have
question featur under the circumst such as amount too high or too low odd
name time and place and ident name and address fraud can often involv
question journal entri in the record such as inappropri charg to expens
account or inventori for exampl larg journal entri in the inventori account near the
end of the year might point to a coverup of inventori theft
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3833
an overabund number of void might mean that a fraudster is void legitim sale
and pocket the proce excess credit memo might also signal the revers of
legitim sale and the divers of cash too mani late charg might indic that an
account receiv is delinqu becaus it is a fictiti account and therefor will never be
paid stale item on ani reconcili bear watch for exampl stale outstand check
mai indic attempt conceal of embezzl loss or divert cash origin
document such as invoic should be us to author transact becaus photocopi
or duplic document can be subject to manipul and alter
networth method
examin for fraud not onli involv the examin of the entiti book and record it
might also entail the estim of the fraud suspect chang in net worth or expenditur
if fraud is suspect then us either of the networth method might help in establish
evid of a fraud
the networth method or compar networth analysi is us to prove illicit incom
circumstanti by show that a person asset or expenditur for a given period exce
that which can be account for from known or admit sourc of incom the networth
method is a reliabl method for estim a person illgotten gain the method is us
extens by the intern revenu servic especi in drug and monei launder case
the networth method reli on the familiar balanc sheet format readili recogniz in the
busi world and present a complet financi pictur of a subject it is base on the
theori that increas or decreas in a person net worth dure a period adjust for live
expens allow a determin of incom
net worth can be defin as the differ between asset and liabil at a particular point in
time by compar the subject net worth at the begin and end of a period usual a
calendar year the econom crime investig can determin the increas or decreas in net
worth adjust ar then made for live expens to arriv at incom incom includ
receipt deriv from all sourc thu by subtract fund from known sourc salari
wage interest or dividend for exampl fund from unknown or illeg sourc can
be calcul
the court approv us the networth method in the lead suprem court case of
holland v unit state 348 us 121 1954 along with the three companion case smith v
trace illicit transact investig
3834 2011 fraud examin manual
unit state 348 us 147 1954 friedberg v unit state 348 142 1954 and unit state v
calderon 348 us 160 1954 these case outlin broad principl to govern the trial and
review of case base on the networth method of prove incom
the networth method is often us when sever of the subject asset or liabil have
chang dure the period under examin and when the target financi record ar not
avail
an individu asset liabil and live expens can be determin from a varieti of
sourc such as
the subject
inform or sourc
real estat record
judgment and lien record
bankruptci record
state motor vehicl record
loan applic
financi statement
account work paper
lawsuit and deposit
surveil
credit card applic or statement
tax return
insur record
child support and divorc record
employ applic and salari check
companion or associ
cancel check and deposit item
the question might aris regard why item that do not chang should be includ in the
networth statement particularli sinc thei have no bear on the final result the answer is
that a networth statement give a complet financi pictur of the subject and therefor
should be as complet as possibl so that the target will not be abl to contest it on the
ground that item were omit addition the networth statement can be the
foundat for examin of the subject and a complet statement will prove extrem
valuabl at that time
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3835
there ar two basic method of networth comput the asset method and the expenditur
or sourc and applic of fund method thei ar discuss in detail herein
the asset method should be us when the subject ha invest illeg fund to accumul
wealth and acquir asset caus net worth valu of asset over liabil to increas from
year to year the expenditur method is best us when the subject spend illicit incom on
consum such as travel and entertain that would not caus an increas in
net worth
each method ha similar step begin both method by assembl the financi and
behavior profil identifi all major asset and liabil sourc of incom and major
expens dure the relev period the increas if ani in the subject net worth or the
level of expenditur is then compar to the legitim fund avail unaccount fund
might be infer to come from illicit or hidden sourc
the financi profil
the first step is to prepar the financi profil of the suspect the financi profil is
essenti a financi statement with certain modif and addit that show what the
defend own ow earn and spend at ani given point or over a period of time the
profil might yield direct evid of illeg incom or hidden asset or circumstanti
evid thereof by show that the suspect expenditur exceed known sourc of
incom
the financi profil will identifi most illicit fund that ar deposit to account or
expend in signific amount it will not catch rel small currenc transact
particularli if thei were for conceal activ consum or for unusu onetim
expens such as medic bill
determin the target asset liabil incom and expens from the follow sourc
interview
the target
associ
document from financi sourc eg account banker
bank account record
mortgag and loan file
credit card record
trace illicit transact investig
3836 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return
public record
busi file
real estat file
court record
to prepar the financi profil follow the follow six step
step 1
identifi all signific asset held by the suspect an asset is cash on hand or anyth els
of valu that can be convert into cash
cash on hand is coin and currenc bill coin feder reserv note in the subject
possess on the subject person in the subject s resid or other place in a nomine
hand or in a safedeposit box it doe not includ monei in ani account with a financi
institut when us the networth method the item that mai be the most difficult to
verifi is the amount of cash on hand which is usual claim by defend to be suffici
to account for all or part of the unknown sourc of incom to establish a firm start net
worth it must be shown that the target had no larg cash sum for which he wa not given
credit thi is usual done by offer evid that negat the exist of a cash hoard
such evid might includ
written or oral admiss of the subject concern net worth a sign networth
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand
low earn in preexamin year as shown by record of former employ
andor tax return file by subject
net worth as establish by book and record of the subject
financi statement present for credit or other purpos at a time befor or dure the
period under examin bank loan compani and bond compani ar some of
the better sourc from which to obtain thi type of document
bankruptci befor examin period
prior indebted compromis of overdu debt and avoid of bankruptci
instal bui
histori of low earn and expenditur and check return for insuffici fund a
financi histori cover member of the subject famili also might be help
loss of furnitur and busi becaus of financi reason
receipt of some type of public assist
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3837
step 2
identifi all signific liabil a liabil is an oblig debt aris from an oral or
written promis to pai
step 3
identifi all incom sourc dure the relev time period incom includ monei or other
thing of valu receiv in exchang for servic or good incom is never includ as an
asset loan proce ar not includ as incom but ar treat as an asset that is offset by a
correspond liabil
step 4
identifi all signific expens incur dure the relev period an expens is ani
payment for consum for person or busi reason over the relev time period
expens ar not includ as liabil
step 5
analyz the inform you have collect by us the follow chart
the financi profil
typic asset for each signific asset determin
resid
real estat
bank account
stock and
bond
automobil
insur
cash on hand
jewelri
cloth
collect
pension
home
furnish
boat
when wa it acquir and from whom
how much did it cost
how wa it paid for currenc check cashier
check
what sourc of fund wa us to acquir it
what document exist for the purchas and
where is it
typic liabil for each signific liabil determin
mortgag
other loan
line of credit
credit card
instal purchas
account payabl
what wa the origin amount of the liabil
what is the present balanc due
when wa the liabil incur
what wa the purpos for the loan or debt
how were the proce us and where were thei
deposit
trace illicit transact investig
3838 2011 fraud examin manual
tax and other bill
alimoni and child support
what secur collater if ani wa given for the
debt
what document exist for the transact and
where is it
wa the debt written off as a bad loan for tax
purpos
who wa the creditor or lender
typic sourc of fund
for each sourc of fund determin
salari
gift
rental incom
dividend
interest
sale of asset
insur
proce
commiss
and fee
award
inherit
disabl
payment
what wa the total amount dure a given period
what wa the sourc
how wa it paid for currenc check other mean
when were the fund receiv
where wa it deposit
how wa it spent
what document exist eg w2 or 1099
form and where is it
typic expenditur
for each major expenditur item determin
rent and
mortgag
health cost
interest on
loan
credit card
car payment
travel
cloth
util
food
insur
what wa the total amount spent
how wa it paid for
where were the fund obtai ned to pai the expens
what document exist and where is it
when wa the payment made
the behavior profil
the financi profil might give inaccur or fals neg read unless certain activ
ar identifi which is done through prepar the behavior profil the behavior profil
might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such as larg debt as well as
addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent signific amount of
cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from hi disclos bank account or no
admit sourc of cash incom he must have other undisclos sourc of incom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3839
us the financialbehavior profil as a guid request an interview with the suspect pin
down the suspect incom asset and account otherwis the subject might invent
excus or prepar fals testimoni or document to account for the unexplain incom
networth analysi
ani recipi of fund whether honest or suspect ha onli four wai of dispos of
incom save it bui asset pai off debt or spend it
networth analysi begin with the complet of a suspect financi profil through
identif of the suspect asset liabil incom and expens a networth statement
can be determin onc a networth statement is complet through the identif of a
suspect asset liabil incom and expens chang in the suspect net worth can be
compar to hi known incom and differ can be infer to be from unknown
sourc
compar net worth asset method
again the asset method is advis when it is suspect that the subject ha purchas
asset or otherwis increas hi net worth it can be appli for ani number of year but
ideal it is best to start with the year befor the suspect fraudul activ began the
formula is
asset
liabil
net worth
prior year net worth
net worth increas
live expens
incom or expenditur
fund from known sourc
fund from unknown sourc
in comput the compar net worth these issu should be consid
all asset should be valu at cost not fair market valu subsequ appreci or
depreci of asset is ignor
the amount of fund avail to the subject from legitim sourc should be
estim or comput gener the amount of the subject expenditur
trace illicit transact investig
3840 2011 fraud examin manual
particularli hardtodocu live cost such as food and entertain should be
estim conserv to give the subject the benefit of ani doubt in attempt to
estim person live expens you should consult the us bureau of labor statist
thi agenc publish an annual tabl that detail person live expens such as
util food and ga
alwai attempt to interview the subject to identifi all alleg sourc of fund and to
negat defens that he might rais later
to comput the compar net worth us the asset method perform the follow step
establish the start point gener the year befor the target illeg activ begin
thi will be refer to as year on in the follow comput
comput the target net worth at the end of year on identifi all asset held by the
subject valu at cost includ asset acquir earlier and the amount of current
liabil
the differ between the valu of the asset and the liabil is the target net worth at
year on or open net worth
exampl
year on
asset at cost liabil
resid 100000 mort gage balanc 90000
stock and bond 30000 automobil loan
automobil 20000 balanc 10000
total 150000 total 100000
asset 150000
liabil 100000
net worth 50000
comput the target net worth for year two us the same method
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3841
exampl
year two
asset at cost liabil
resid 100000 mortgag balanc 50000
stock and bond 30000
automobil 20000 automobil loan
cd 50000 balanc 0
total 200000 total 50000
asset 200000
liabil 50000
net worth 150000
note that in the exampl the target net wo rth increas by 100000 dure year two
to determin the sourc of such an increas determin the target known incom
dure year two and subtract known expens for year two
exampl
year two
incom expens
salari 30000 mortgag interest
payment
20000
commiss 20000 live expens 10000
total 50000 total 30000
the differ between the target incom and expens equal the increas or decreas in
net worth from year on to year two which can be attribut to known sourc here it is
20000 subtract the increas in net worth fr om known sourc from the total increas in
net worth to determin the amount from unknown sourc
exampl
total increas in net worth 100000
increas attribut to known sourc 20000
dollar from unknown sourc 80000
repeat the abov step for subsequ year as necessari
trace illicit transact investig
3842 2011 fraud examin manual
expenditur method
the expenditur method also known as the sourc and applic of fund method
compar the suspect known expenditur and known sourc of fund dure a given
period of time ani excess expenditur must be the result of incom from unknown
sourc it is close relat to the networth analysi account variat of the same
principl
the tabl below illustr the formula us to comput net worth us the expenditur
method the step ar discuss in greater detail below
expenditur applic of fund
known sourc of fund
fund from unknown sourc
to comput the subject net worth us the expenditur method follow three step first
establish the subject known expenditur for the relev year expenditur includ the
us or applic of fund for ani purpos includ deposit to bank account purchas
of major asset travel and entertain expens and payment of loan and credit card
debt second identifi all sourc of fund avail to the subject includ loan and gift
as well as cash on hand from previou year third comput the differ between the
amount of the suspect expenditur and hi known incom to determin the amount
attribut to unknown sourc
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3843
exampl
subject year on year two
applic of fund
increas in bank balanc 2000 10000
down payment on resid 10000
purchas of automobil 10000
mortgag payment 8000 20000
credit card payment 5000 10000
other expens 15000 30000
total 40000 80000
less known sourc of fund
cash on hand 1000
salari 30000 38000
interest earn on save
account 1000 2000
loan proce 8000
total 40000 40000
fund from unk nown or illeg sourc 0 40000
the follow exampl demonstr how a networth analysi assist prosecutor in their
amend complaint against a fraud suspect
exampl
r peeri ag 40 the execut director of a fivest commiss plan a lowlevel
radioact wast dump wa charg with two ne w charg of feloni theft peeri wa also
charg with on feder count of wire fraud
peeri wa accus of wire 115000 to a person account in georgia and prosecutor
said thei suspect him of take 600000 he wa also charg with two count of us
commiss fund in nebraska to bui car a 1990 bmw valu at 67000 and a
1991 bmw valu at 92000
peeri wa paid 52000 annual he live in a hous valu at 305000 and at the
time of hi arrest had six luxuri car includ jaguar mercedesbenz and bmw
trace illicit transact investig
3844 2011 fraud examin manual
bank deposit analysi method
the bank deposit analysi method is anoth method to prove unknown sourc of fund by
indirect or circumstanti evid like the other indirect method of proof the bank
deposit method comput incom by show what happen to a subject fund it is
base on the theori that if a subject receiv monei he can onli do two thing with it he
can deposit it or he can spend it
thi method is appli when asset and liabil ar fairli constant from year to year and
indic of extravag expenditur ar nonexist but through investig the
suspect known sourc of incom ar be deposit into financi institut
under thi method incom is prove through analyz bank deposit cancel check and
the subject currenc transact adjust for nonincom item ar made to arriv at
incom a basic formula for the bank deposit method is
total deposit to all account
transfer and redeposit
net deposit to all account
cash expenditur
total receipt from all sourc
fund from known sourc
fund from unknown or illeg sourc
the bank deposit method is recommend as a primari method of proof when most of the
subject incom is deposit and the subject book and record ar unavail withheld
incomplet or maintain on a cash basi us of the bank deposit method is not limit to
these circumst howev even though the target book and record might appear to
be complet and accur the method can still be us and there is no requir to
disprov the accuraci of the book and record
the basic sourc of inform for thi analysi includ interview analys of the book
and record and analys of the bank account a thorough interview will determin the
subject expenditur by cash and check identi fy all bank account and determin all loan
and other receipt
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3845
total deposit
total deposit consist not onli of amount deposit to all bank account maintain or
control by the target but also deposit made to account in save and loan compani
invest trust brokerag hous and credit union total deposit also includ the
accumul increas of cash on hand becaus some subject have bank account in
fictiti name or under special titl such as special account no 1 truste account
or trade account the investig should look for thi type of account dure the
investig if a subject list check on a deposit ticket and deduct an amount paid to him
in cash split deposit onli the net amount of the deposit should be us in comput
total deposit
addit item that must be includ in deposit ar properti and note that the subject
receiv in payment for servic the accept practic is to consid these item as
depositori into which fund have been place for futur us
net deposit
all transfer or exchang between bank account as well as fund that ar redeposit ar
nonincom item and ar subtract from total deposit to yield net deposit failur to
elimin these item would result in an overstat of incom
cash expenditur
cash expenditur consist of the total outlai of fund less net bank disburs the total
outlai of fund includ all payment made by cash or check there is no need to determin
which part wa paid by cash and which part by check total outlai includ but ar not
limit to
purchas of capit asset to invest determin from settlement sheet invoic
statement and the like
loan repay determin from loan ledger of bank or other creditor
live expens can be determin from the same sourc present in the net worth
and expenditur section
purchas busi expens less noncash item such as depreci rental expens
and the like
trace illicit transact investig
3846 2011 fraud examin manual
net bank disburs can be determin by the follow formula
net deposit to all account
begin balanc
net bank fund avail
end balanc
net bank disburs
fund from known sourc includ but ar not limit to salari busi profit
insur proce gift receiv loan and inherit fund from known sourc ar
subtract from total receipt or incom to arriv at fund from unknown or
illeg sourc
rebut defens to indirect method of proof
circumstanti evid of excess incom is often met with the defens that the extra fund
came from cash accumul earlier or from other legitim sourc such as loan from
rel to rebut these defens the fraud examin must pin down the amount of cash on
hand at the begin of the relev period through for exampl amount list on
financi statement or claim in interview and do the follow
obtain a financi histori of the target and spous through interview and other mean
show date and place of employ salari and bonus and ani other relat
incom
determin whether the spous had ani separ sourc of fund that were us to
purchas jointli held asset or deposit in joint account if so the spous must be
includ in the financi profil calcul
claim of a prior substanti cash hoard might be rebut by show that the target
live penuri borrow monei made instal purchas incur larg debt
wa delinqu on account had a poor credit rate or file for bankruptci claim that
cash came from famili or other privat loan might be rebut by show that the
alleg lender wa incap of gener the amount supposedli lent the absenc of
ani document reflect the sourc of the alleg loan no bank account
withdraw and the absenc of other sourc of fund avail to the lender
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3847
the networth analysisif record can be obtai nedi a signific tool in document ill
gotten gain with thi as a basi the follow section cover the major scheme us to
commit fraud against compani and government agenc
locat hidden asset
common assethid techniqu
there ar mani techniqu a fraudster might us to hide illgotten gain a target mai
attempt to preserv hi asset by open hidden bank account purchas real estat
through a straw or front or transfer hi asset to other parti or to account that might
escap detect
transfer to famili member or parti under their control
the most common mean of hide asset particularli real estat and busi interest is to
transfer the asset into the hand of anoth parti that will allow the target to maintain
control in mani case the target will transfer the asset to a spous or anoth member of
the spous famili and a husband might make the transfer in hi wife maiden name
such transfer can be identifi through a search of voter registr marriag record and
probat in the spous maiden name transf er to famili member can be detect by
compar the target previou financi statem ent with the most recent on those asset
appear on the oldest statement but not appear on the most recent statement should be
examin close to determin the natur of the transact the purchas ident and the
consider for the sale
children or famili trust
a target might seek to protect asset by transfer them to a children or famili trust from
a person estat these asset would then be protect from judgment or bankruptci
proceed in a court of law if the transfer wa made to defeat creditor howev it can be
set asid by the court
home mortgag paydown
in mani case subject seek to hide their asset from seizur by prepai a signific
portion of their home mortgag by do thi the hider mai successfulli shelter hi asset
in a homestead exempt as allow in texa florida and other state that will surviv
trace illicit transact investig
3848 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci or other claim against them by document the mortgag prepay the
fraud examin can often show undisclos or hidden incom from outsid sourc
exampl
a cashier check for 96000 wa found to ha ve been us as a prepay to a home
mortgag by obtain the front and back of the cashier che ck fraud examin were abl
to locat anoth bank account belong to the defend
insur polici
some target mai purchas insur under the term of a whole life or univers life
insur polici the borrow mai make addit payment on the polici these payment
accru at a high interest rate and enhanc the overal valu of the insur polici
a sophist subject might deposit substanti moni into an exist insur polici
think that the fraud examin will not look beyond the face valu of the polici into the
equiti built up by prepay the fraud examin should therefor alwai examin the
financi statement of a target to locat insur polici and examin the equiti in these
polici as a potenti asset
prepaid credit card
mani credit account todai permit the card holder to prepai their account mani peopl
attempt to hide asset have us the prepay option to hide cash from creditor
prepay of credit card account can also be found in cash manag account cma
offer by stock brokerag firm
save bond purchas
drug dealer and tax evad often us save bond purchas as a mean to conceal
their readi cash in sever recent case defend in financi crime have purchas
bond in their individu name their spous name in their maiden name or their
children name
cashier check and travel check
mani crimin purchas cashier check and travel check to hide their financi
deal and reduc the amount of cash thei have to carri by purchas cashier check or
travel check in denomin of less than 10000 which is the threshold for file a
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3849
currenc transact report ctr the crimin can carri negoti financi instrument
that can be exchang almost ani place in the world
comput databas
to begin a computerbas investig determin which record ar avail next
determin how much record check is necessari which record should be focus on and
the locat of concentr area of concentr might includ voter registr
record court record or real estat file
locat asset through subpoena
although examin investig fraud do not have an absolut right to see nonpubl
record those who ar involv in investig involv civil or crimin proceed
might have subpoena power allow them to obtain such record includ bank account
and loan record record from account and tax prepar includ incom tax return
and relat document mortgag compani record telephon record credit card
statement credit report compani record hotel and travel record telex record
overnight packag envelop and passport
locat asset offshor
some target might try to hide their asset offshor often in tax haven and secreci
jurisdict histor some of the most popular offshor jurisdict have been
switzerland the cayman island the netherland antil and panama
to locat offshor asset fraud examin should take all of the follow step
review domest bank account record for wire transfer or other transact involv
offshor bank account
determin whether the subject person travel oversea oversea travel can often be
document from us custom record avail through fincen
attempt to locat the subject travel agenc
attempt to identifi mean emploi to move cash offshor by
us of multipl cashier check
overnight mail envelop
other method
trace illicit transact investig
3850 2011 fraud examin manual
after fund have been trace offshor the examin should look for transfer back to the
unit state a sophist target might us a foreign attornei or bank offic as a truste
or front to purchas asset in the unit state or appoint the truste as manag of a us
busi
subject also might obtain access to their asset offshor by us foreign credit card mani
intern institut now offer mastercard or visa account and all account record ar
maintain in the foreign countri
sophist subject might also obtain foreign passport in a fictiti name if request
some countri offer such passport to peopl who deposit 25000 in the staterun financi
institut
it mai difficult to obtain inform on foreign bank but it is not imposs db
publish sever guid with inform about busi in latin america europ and
other region of the world the us depart of commerc ha foreigncountri expert
who can direct you to sourc of busi inform on ani countri in the world
also with the expans of the internet as a mean of global commun inform
on foreign countri and busi is avail through the internet or through a
commerci databas or onlin servic
in hi book competitor intellig leonard fuld provid a us chapter on locat
inform on foreign busi he suggest the follow resourc as start point
secur broker with expertis in deal with foreign busi
the intern trade commiss
intern trade show
foreign consul
foreign chamber of commerc
foreign magazin and directori
fuld provid a list of consul chamber of commerc magazin and directori in hi
book fuld suggest check euromonei 500 which contain profil of the world top 500
bank or the europa world year book which provid basic data on bank around the world
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3851
the text of newspap such as the new york time or the washington post mai be search
for articl on the foreign bank or the foreign countri involv the text of these and other
larg newspap ar avail through onlin servic such as lexisnexi
if the subject engag in a mailord or retail busi a simpl wai to get inform
about hi bank account is to send him a check ronald l mendel in hi book how to do
financi asset investig suggest bui a small item from the subject by us a check
when the cancel check is return it will provid the name and possibl the account
number of the subject bank he suggest that if the subject doe not engag in mailord
sale the same goal mai be accomplish by send the subject a small refund check
offic of intern affair
the us depart of justic offic of intern affair oia in certain
circumst can offer assist to us fraud examin seek to recov
offshor asset
oia is respons for
extradit request
request for foreign documentari evid bank and busi record and other
offici document
interview and deposit of foreign wit
assist to obtain appear of foreign wit in us court
foreign search and seizur compel handwrit exemplar and
electron surveil
the oia us a number of legal resourc to obtain inform from foreign countri
such as letter rogatori and mutual legal assist treati mlat
letter rogatori
letter rogatori ar formal request by the court of on countri to the court of anoth
countri
the inform need for a letter rogatori request is as follow
the fact of the case show at least a reason suspicion that the offens under
investig might have been commit
the name and identifi inform of peopl or entiti involv in the matter
trace illicit transact investig
3852 2011 fraud examin manual
the name and identifi inform of wit or entiti whose name might be
on bank record if account ar held in other name
the name address and other inform concern bank busi or bank
account number
the offens be investig or prosecut in the unit state to includ penalti
the assist request of the foreign countri whether it is document testimoni
freez of asset etc if you want a foreign magistr to question a wit write out
the question that you want the wit to be ask even if you ask to be present dure
the question
the procedur to be follow how to authent busi document and record for
us in us court
the procedur for make formal request by a letter rogatori is as follow
call the oia team handl the relev part of the world concern the search for
guidanc and assist
draft a letter rogatori follow an exemplar or other materi provid by the oia
have the oia repres review and approv the draft
the prosecutor will then file a motion in feder court for issuanc of a letter rogatori
togeth with a memorandum in support and propos order submit two copi on
for the clerk and on for the foreign court to be sign by the judg
the judg sign both letter rogatori
file on sign letter rogatori with the court clerk
have the court clerk authent the second sign letter rogatori either via apostil
or exemplif certif
have the letter rogatori translat into the proper languag
send the sign letter rogatori and translat to the oia for transmiss through
diplomat channel to the proper foreign govern
the minist of justic in the foreign countri normal present the letter rogatori to
the appropri court
the foreign court determin whether to execut the letter rogatori if the
determin is favor the court then obtain the document testimoni and other
inform
evid result from the execut of the letter rogatori is return through
diplomat channel to the oia
the oia will then forward the inform to the prosecutor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3853
letter rogatori should be written in simpl nontechn english and should not includ
unnecessari inform that mai confus court in the receiv foreign state avoid us of
the term discoveri similarli to avoid the appear of a fish expedit that mai result
in refus of the foreign countri to execut the request try not to us phrase such as ani and
all document request for document should be as specif as possibl if particular
procedur to be follow by the foreign court ar prefer includ the specif in the
letter rogatori for exampl verbatim transcript place wit under oath or permiss
for us or foreign counsel to attend or particip in proceed if possibl
mutual legal assist treati
mutual legal assist treati mlat ar treati between the unit state and
foreign countri that provid for the exchang of inform and document relat to
narcot monei launder and other financi crime
request for foreign assist under mutual legal assist treati mlat ar usual
quicker and more effici than file letter rogatori the procedur for make formal
request by mlat is as follow
no us court involv is requir
the prosecutor call the oia for guidanc and will send a draft request to the oia for
edit
when the oia director approv the request the oia transmit the request to the
foreign central or compet author
if a translat is requir the request agenc is respons for obtain it
the oia transmit the translat to the request countri
the request countri proper author determin whether the request meet treati
requir and if it doe transmit the request to the appropri record agenc
for execut
the execut author transmit the evid through the proper author to the oia
which forward it to the prosecutor
the fraud examinerprosecutor should inspect the evid for respons and
complet as well as certif of authent of busi record notifi the oia at
onc of ani problem
the unit state current ha bilater mlat in forc with the follow countri
anguilla antigua and barbuda argentina australia austria bahama barbado beliz
belgium brazil british virgin island ca nada the cayman island colombia cypru
trace illicit transact investig
3854 2011 fraud examin manual
czech republ dominica egypt estonia european union finland franc germani
greec grenada hong kong sar hungari india ireland israel itali jamaica japan
korea latvia liechtenstein lithuania luxembourg mexico montserrat morocco the
netherland panama the philippin poland romania russian feder saint kitt and
nevi saint lucia saint vincent and the grenadin south africa spain sweden
switzerland thailand trinidad and tobago turk and caico island turkei unit
kingdom uruguai and venezuela
anoth method of obtain foreign bank or busi record is by obtain a releas and
consent form from the defend execut of such a waiver can be compel by order of
a us court thi procedur is not univers accept particularli in switzerland the
channel island the turk and caico island or the cayman island
public record
of cours a great deal of inform that is us in trace illicit transact particularli
real and person properti file is a matter of public record for more inform see the
sourc of inform and access inform onlin chapter
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3901
