2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions 
A subject’s income can be established by the direct or indirect approach. The direct 
approach, or the specific-items method of proving income, relies on specific transactions, 
such as sales or expenses, to determine income. The indirect approach relies on 
circumstantial proof of income. Indirect methods will be discussed in the next section. 
 
To trace financial transactions using the direct method, the examiner must obtain relevant 
financial records. 
 
Financial Institutions 
Fraud examiners should recognize that in most instances bank records are not readily 
obtainable. Substantial requirements usually must be met to justify legal process (e.g., 
subpoena, search warrant, and the like), which banks will customarily demand as a condition 
for disclosure. Preliminary investigation is of the utmost importance to lay the basis for 
obtaining such records. More information on banking transactions is contained in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
The availability of investigative avenues often determines whether a promising fraud 
examination will grind to a halt or proceed successfully. Legal advice from a prosecutor or 
civil counsel should be sought in all such instances. It should also be recognized that bank 
officials and employees can be questioned by fraud examiners in the same manner as any 
other potential witnesses and that their responses to proper inquiries might provide 
important information. 
 
Bank records are perhaps the single most important financial source available to a fraud 
examiner. In addition to their use as evidence for fraud, a bank’s records might provide leads 
on sources of funds, expenditures, and personal affairs. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following information can be of value to fraud examiners seeking information from 
banks concerning pertinent financial transactions of economic crime perpetrators. It is based 
in part on the operational guidelines issued by the American Bankers Association to all 
member banks in the United States and on the training guides issued by the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury. 
 
Types of Financial Institutions  
Banks are classified primarily by their major services. 
• Commercial banks  offer businesses and individuals such services as checking accounts, 
loans, and exchange instruments. 
• Savings banks  and savings and loan associations  handle savings accounts and mortgage loans. 
• Trust companies  handle property for others under various types of fiduciary 
accommodations. 
 
Many banks combine all three services. Banks are organized under either state or national 
banking laws. 
 
The basic bank functions are as follows: 
• Receive deposits 
• Pay checks 
• Transfer funds 
• Make loans 
• Collect sundry financial instruments 
• Hold and administer property for others 
• Perform other services, such as renting safe deposit boxes 
 
Internal Bookkeeping Procedures 
The internal record-keeping practices and procedures of banks not only are complex but 
they constantly are changing because of the growing sophistication of computer technology. 
Banks are moving steadily toward an electronic funds-transfer system that will eliminate the 
use of checks. Such a system will automatically transfer money from the account of the 
purchaser to the account of the seller. Paper trails will disappear. Detailed familiarity with the 
intricacies of internal bank operations is not essential, however, for the fraud examiner to 
obtain the types of information necessary for investigations. What is essential is the 
knowledge that records of customers’ transactions are maintained and retained. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.807 
Electronic Banking 
Electronic banking is possibly the most common form of banking today. Electronic banking 
includes automated teller machine transactions; point-of-sale transactions using credit or 
debit cards; smart cards, which are gaining popularity in the U.S. (and are already popular in 
Europe); wire transfers; online bill payment through Internet banking and biller websites; 
and traditional automated clearing house (ACH) applications of direct payment and direct 
deposit. 
 
All of these forms of electronic banking are governed by the Electronic Fund Transfer Act 
(EFTA) (15, U.S.C., § 1693 (See Appendix A)). The EFTA currently requires financial 
institutions to keep records on all transactions of $3,000 or more. 
 
Retention of Records 
The Bank Secrecy Act set forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements 
designed to help track large or unusual financial transactions. The Act consists of two titles. 
Title I contains provisions requiring financial institutions and securities brokers and dealers 
to keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of their customers. Title II of the 
Act (originally entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act) requires banks, 
“financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities brokers and dealers, currency 
exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to report certain transactions to the 
government.  
 
Title I—Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. The recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. Under these regulations, all institutions are required to keep a record of any 
financial transaction of more than $10,000. 
 
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep an original, microfilm, or other 
copy or reproduction of most demand deposits (checking account) and savings account 
records must be retained for five years. The records must include signature cards; 
statements, ledger cards or other records disclosing all transactions, that is, deposits and 
withdrawals; and copies of customers’ check s, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks drawn on the bank or issued and payable by it. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.808   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a 
customer’s checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit 
tickets. They must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check 
deposited to a customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply to checks written or deposits made in excess of 
$100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all pertinent records, including the checks and 
deposits in amounts less than $100, rather than sort their records into two categories. The 
Bank Secrecy Act also requires financial institutions to retain a record of any extension of 
credit of more than $10,000 as well as each tr ansfer of $10,000 or more outside the United 
States. 
 
Title II—Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Title II of the Bank Secrecy Act is codified as 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5330. The purpose of 
these sections is to require certain reports or records to be filed or kept by “financial 
institutions.” Section 5312(a)(2) defines “financial institution” very broadly to include not 
only banks, but also securities brokers; curre ncy exchange houses; insurance companies; loan 
companies; travel agencies; telegraph companie s; issuers or cashiers of checks or money 
orders; auto, boat, and airplane dealers; casinos; and persons involved in real estate closings 
and settlements. Only recently has the Treasury Department begun to reign in much of the 
non-financial institution transaction business in the by requiring registration of these diverse 
enterprises. 
 
Gaining Access to Records Held by Financial Institutions 
One of the most difficult challenges to the fraud examiner will be to gain access to the 
records held by financial institutions. Although bank records are one of the most important 
sources available to fraud examinations, they are not readily obtainable. Most suspects will 
not willingly give their records to a fraud examiner, especially if the records contain 
potentially incriminating evidence.  
 
Moreover, financial institutions’ authority to di sclose bank records is restricted by federal 
and state law. For example, the Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions 
from disclosing financial information about individual customers until the governmental 
authority obtains the customer’s consent, a court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or 
some other formal demand, with limited exceptions. And even though Right to Financial 
Privacy Act applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and other 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.809 
financial institutions also will not release such information to private parties absent legal 
process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
As a result, substantial requirements must generally be met before banks will disclose such 
information. In general, bank records can be obtained in most jurisdictions by using one of 
the following methods: 
• Civil discovery 
• Administrative subpoena or summons 
• Civil summons 
• Customer authorized disclosure 
• Court subpoena 
• Grand jury subpoena 
• Search warrant  
 
Furthermore, the cost of obtaining bank records can be quite high. Banks generally charge 
both public and private entities to search and retrieve records. There are usually additional 
costs for the reproduction of records. It might be prudent for the examiner to limit record 
requests as much as possible.  
 
Despite such complications, the examiner might attempt to obtain the financial records of 
suspects by contacting their former spouses. Former spouses might have banking records 
useful to the fraud examiner that they may be happy to turn over. Similarly, the banking 
records might also be a part of a divorce settlement or a lawsuit. 
 
Types of Financial Records 
The financial records identified and discussed below are limited to those of particular 
interest to fraud examiners. 
 
Account Opening Documents 
Account opening documents include the records required to create a bank account, but the 
types of files required may vary depending on the type of account. 
 
PERSONAL ACCOUNTS 
Signature cards are the key records required to open and use a personal account. The 
signature card is the evidence of a contract between the customer and bank. When a 
depositor opens an account, the bank requires that a signature card be signed. By signing the 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.810   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
card, the depositor becomes a party to a contract with the bank under which he accepts all 
rules and regulations of the bank and authorizes the bank to honor his orders for 
withdrawing funds. For a corporation or a partnership account, the signature card is 
accompanied by copies of resolutions of the board of directors or partnership agreements 
naming the person authorized to draw checks on the accounts. 
 
The signature card is a source of valuable information. Although its form varies, the card 
usually contains such data as banking connections and the date and amount of the initial 
deposit. The initial deposit traced through the bank’s records may disclose a source of 
income. The identification of the person who opened the account might be significant, 
especially if the depositor used an alias. 
 
Many banks investigate the references give n by a new customer. They might also make 
inquiries of various credit reporting agencies. This information is contained in a 
correspondence file or a credit file that can contain comments of the person who opened the 
account and might show information given by the depositor when opening the account. 
 
In banks using Automatic Data Processing (ADP), the signature card also contains an 
account number assigned to the customer. In tracing information about a subject’s 
transactions with the bank, the account number must be used. If it does not appear on the 
signature card, it can be located in the bank’s cross-reference file. Assigned account numbers 
are encoded on other documents relating to the depositor by means of a system called 
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR). The card also might contain the depositor’s 
Social Security number. 
 
The signature card might define the account as either a regular or a special checking account. 
The main difference between the two is the service charge made by the bank. The regular 
checking account is used mostly by businesses and individuals who maintain large average 
balances. The special checking account is used by individuals who usually have small  
account balances. 
 
When requesting the signature card, the fraud examiner should determine whether the bank 
maintains any type of central file. Most large banks have a central file that lists all 
departments with which a customer has had dealings. If the bank has such a file, the 
examiner does not need to check with each department to obtain information. The subject 
might at one time have had a bank account that later was closed. Requests for information 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.811 
from a bank about a subject should always include a reference to both active and closed 
accounts. Records of closed accounts are usually maintained in a separate file. 
 
In addition to a signature card, the account-opening file for a personal account might 
contain a copy of some form of identification (e.g., driver’s license) the account holder 
provided the bank. 
 
BUSINESS ACCOUNTS 
In addition to the documentation required for opening a personal account, the opening 
documents for a corporate account will include a copy of the corporate resolution 
authorizing the opening of a bank account and possibly the company’s articles of 
incorporation. These documents should indicate who the company’s corporate officers are 
and its date of incorporation.  
 
For an unincorporated company to open a bank account, the baking institution might 
require the company to provide a doing business as (DBA) registration, fictitious name 
registration, or business registration certificate. Generally, the required documentation 
depends on the applicable state laws. 
 
Negotiated Checks 
Canceled checks written by a subject or received from others provide the fraud examiner 
with much more than amounts, payees, and endorsees. Of particular interest are checks that 
have been cashed. All banks use a series of codes or symbols imprinted on the front of a 
check to show that the check has been cashed. The specific codes used in various areas can 
be obtained locally. 
 
A useful technique to help examine negotiated checks is to list the information from the 
checks on a spreadsheet (either manual or electronic). Checks should be listed by number 
and date on the left with the payee, amount, and purpose of the check, if known, to the 
right. This will show the subject’s routine monthly or annual expenditures that can be useful 
for computing the comparative net worth. The absence of a check for a recurring payment 
for a particular month might indicate a cash payment, which in turn would indicate possible 
undisclosed cash income. Examine the backs of checks payable to cash and note where they 
were cashed. The depository stamp can identify the bank at which the check was cashed. 
This information may provide a lead to another bank account. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.812   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECK 21 
“With image exchange, and the emerging fraud detection technology, banks will be able to 
know if sufficient funds are in the account … whether the customer is who he claims to be 
… and whether the check is legitimate.” 6 
 
In July 2003, Congress issued final regulations regarding the availability of funds and 
collection of checks. These regulations, known as “Check 21,” created “substitute checks,” a 
type of negotiable instrument that became the legal equivalent of paper checks. This 
provision facilitates the efficient collection and return of checks in electronic form by 
alleviating the collection requirement that depository banks actually send the original paper 
checks to collecting banks for payment.  
 
Under Check 21, a depository bank can transfer check information electronically to a 
collecting bank via a substitute check for presentment. The collecting bank is then required 
to take presentment of the substitute check as long as it meets all the legal requirements of 
the original check. Therefore, rather than actually processing and sending an original  
paper check across cities and states, the depositing bank can now collect the substitute  
check electronically. 
 
A substitute check is a paper reproduction of the original check that states, “This is a legal 
copy of your check. You can use it the same  way you would use the original check.” Upon 
transfer, presentment, or return, a bank warrants that the substitute check submitted is an 
accurate depiction of the physical check, and that no depository bank, drawee, drawer, or 
endorser will be asked or required to pay a check that has already been paid. Essentially, this 
legend on the substitute check informs consumers of their rights to expedited recrediting of 
an amount charged if there is a disputed item and the original or substituted copy is 
necessary to prove the validity of the charge on the account. Under this law, the validity of a 
charge becomes an issue when a consumer is charged twice for a check, the substitute check 
is illegible, or the original check was not properly copied during the imaging process. 
 
Furthermore, Check 21 places the risk of loss associated with substitute checks on the 
reconverting bank that first transferred, presented, or returned the substitute check. 
                                                 
6 Robertson, Bill and Ken Gahre. White-Collar Crime Fighter. Vol. 6, No. 1, Check 21: Blackjack for Check Fraud 
Fighters?   Ridgefield, CT: White Collar Crime101, LLC., 2004. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.813 
Although the reconverting banks can allocate such loss among themselves, they may remain 
liable under warranty claim, indemnity, or recrediting claims. 
 
TRACING CHECKS 
Tracing checks is facilitated by the use of bank identification symbols. Fraud examiners do 
not have to understand the internal bookkeeping procedures used by banks. The concept of 
bank identification symbols, however, is of interest. All checks printed for banking 
institutions contain an ABA transit number. These numbers represent an identification code 
developed by the American Bankers Association. The ABA transit number enables a check 
to be routed to the bank of origin. In the process of routing, a trail is left. 
 
MAGNETIC INK CHARACTER RECOGNITION 
Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) is a machine language and is a check design 
standard to which all banks must conform. Numeric information is printed in magnetic ink 
on the bottom of bank checks and other documents. This coding is electronically scanned by 
computers that convert the magnetic ink notations into electronic impulses readable by a 
computer. MICR information is printed in groupings called fields. The first field on the left 
on bank checks is the Federal Reserve check routing code and the next is the ABA transit 
number. These numbers also appear in the upper right corner of the check. 
 
The account number field shows the drawer’s assigned account number at the bank. When 
the check is processed through the bank, an additional field is added on the right for the 
amount of the check. The dollar amount of the check should always equal the encoded 
MICR amount. These two figures should be compared to make sure that the subject did not 
alter the returned check. All checks, drafts, and similar items that are not encoded with 
magnetic ink cannot be cleared through the Federal Reserve system without special handling. 
 
PREFIX NUMBERS OF CITIES IN NUMERICAL ORDER 
When the ABA established the city and state prefix numbering system, it did so by the 
geographical location of the reserve cities in existence at the time. The prefix numbers 
identify city and state documents. For example, numbers 1 through 49, as seen in the 
following examples, were given to the most populated reserve cities and major banking 
centers at the time. The rest of the numbers, 50 through 99, were assigned to the states from 
East to West. The principal numbers 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 were given to the main collecting 
financial centers (New York, Pennsylvania, Illi nois, Missouri and California). The numbers 
before and after each principal number were generally designated to nearby states. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.814   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PREFIX NUMBERS OF CITIES AND STATES  
1–49   Reserve Cities 
50–99  States 
50–58  Eastern States 
59  Alaska, American Samoa, Guam, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands 
60–69  Southeastern States  
70–79  Central States 
80–88  Southwestern States 
90–99  Western States  
 
RESERVE CITY, MAJOR BANKING CENTER, AND STATE PREFIX NUMBERS  
  1 New York, NY 34 Tacoma, WA 68 Virginia 
  2 Chicago, IL 35 Houston, TX 69 West Virginia 
  3 Philadelphia, PA 36 St. Joseph, MO 70 Illinois 
  4 St. Louis, MO 37 Fort Worth, TX 71 Indiana 
  5 Boston, MA 38 Savannah, GA 72 Iowa 
  6 Cleveland, OH 39 Oklahoma City, OK 73 Kentucky 
  7 Baltimore, MD 40 Wichita, KS 74 Michigan 
  8 Pittsburgh, PA 41 Sioux City, IA 75 Minnesota 
  9 Detroit, MI 43 Lincoln, NE 76 Nebraska 
10 Buffalo, NY 44 Topeka, KS 77 North Dakota  
11 San Francisco, CA 45 Dubuque, IA 78 South Dakota 
12 Milwaukee, WI 46 Galveston, TX 79 Wisconsin 
13 Cincinnati, OH  47 Cedar Rapids, IA 80 Missouri 
14 New Orleans, LA 48 Waco, TX 81 Arkansas 
15 Washington, D.C. 49 Muskogee, OK 82 Colorado  
16 Los Angeles, CA 50 New York 83 Kansas 
17 Minneapolis, MN 51 Connecticut 84 Louisiana  
18 Kansas City, MO 52 Maine 85 Mississippi 
19 Seattle, WA 53 Massachusetts 86 Oklahoma 
20 Indianapolis, IN 54 New Hampshire 87 Tennessee 
21 Louisville, KY 55 New Jersey 88 Texas 
22 St. Paul, MN 56 Ohio 89 --- 
23 Denver, CO 57 Rhode Island 90 California 
24 Portland, OR 58 Vermont 91 Arizona 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.815 
25 Columbus, OH 59 AL, AS, GU, HI, PR, VI 7 92 Idaho 
26 Memphis, TN 60 Pennsylvania 93 Montana 
27 Omaha, NE 61 Alabama 94 Nevada 
28 Spokane, WA 62 Delaware 95 New Mexico 
29 Albany, NY 63 Florida 96 Oregon 
30 San Antonio, TX 64 Georgia 97 Utah 
31 Salt Lake City, UT 65 Maryland 98 Washington 
32 Dallas, TX 66 North Carolina 99 Wyoming 
 
All banks in an area served by a Federal Reserve bank or branch carry the routing symbol of 
the Federal Reserve bank or branch. The Federal Reserve routing symbol (FRRS) 
encompasses the first four digits of the nine-digit routing number. This routing symbol 
identifies where the Federal Reserve bank is located. The first two numbers of the FRRS 
designate the Federal Reserve District in which the bank is located (as shown below). The 12 
Federal Reserve Districts and numbers are as follows:  
 
01—Boston, MA 
02—New York, NY 
03—Philadelphia, PA 
04—Cleveland, OH 
05—Richmond, VA 
06—Atlanta, GA 
07—Chicago, IL 
08—St. Louis, MO 
09—Minneapolis, MN 
10—Kansas City, KS 
11—Dallas, TX 
12—San Francisco, CA 
 
The next two numbers designate the specific bank location of the Federal Reserve branch. A 
thrift institution is designated when “2” is added to the first digit of the FRRS. For example, 
if there is a thrift institution in the first district (Boston) the designation would be “21.” If 
the thrift institution is in a district that has a double digit, such as San Francisco, the 
designation becomes “32.” The next four numbers of the routing number sequence are 
                                                 
7 AL: Alaska; AS: American Samoa; GU: Guam; HI: Hawaii; PR: Puerto Rico; VI: Virgin Islands 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.816   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
always unique to the financial institution; and the last number of the nine digit routing 
number is a digit derived from an algorithmic calculation. 
 
Deposit Tickets 
The deposit ticket is the principal source document for crediting the customer’s account. 
Deposits are first recorded on the deposit ticket or slip that usually segregates currency, 
coins, and checks. The checks are listed separately. In many localities the depositor writes 
the ABA number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket. Either of 
these might help to identify the source of the check. In other localities the bank writes the 
ABA number on the deposit ticket, and in some banks no identifying data is entered on the 
deposit ticket. Regardless of the detail contained on a deposit ticket, bank record-keeping 
systems allow deposits to be identified and traced to their sources.  
 
In working with deposit tickets, the fraud examiner must remember that sometimes the 
depositor splits the deposit, meaning only part of the check is actually deposited. In these 
instances, the customer either receives cash or requests that part of the proceeds be applied 
to a note or interest due to the bank. In some instances, it might be important to determine 
the total amount of cash and checks presented for deposit before deductions. When this is 
the case, the fraud examiner should inquire from the bank how split deposits are handled. 
 
Deposit items can be broken down into two types: on-us items and clearinghouse items. 
 
ON-US ITEMS 
An on-us item  is a check or draft that is presented for payment where the depository bank is 
also the payor bank. For example, a check written by a customer of one bank is deposited by 
the payee at another branch of the same bank. The bank should be able to trace the source 
of any on-us items. The source might be loan proceeds, certificates of deposit, wire transfers, 
bank checks, or checks from other deposits at that bank. If the deposit is the proceeds from 
a loan, obtain and analyze the loan file (examination of the loan file is discussed later in this 
chapter). If the deposit came from a wire transfer, trace the wire transfer to the originating 
bank to see where the funds for the wire transfer originated. This search could lead to other 
accounts, other witnesses, co-conspirators, or offshore transactions. 
 
Bank checks (such as cashier’s checks and money orders) could be an indication of smurfing 
operations. Smurfing  is the process by which a subject structures a deposit into several 
transactions, each less than $10,000, to avoid filing a currency transaction report as required 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.817 
under the Bank Secrecy Act. As the video portion of this course makes clear, smurfing is a 
very common technique for avoiding reporting requirements. Look for large numbers of 
cashier’s checks in even amounts deposited on a regular basis.  
 
CLEARINGHOUSE ITEMS 
Clearinghouse items  are those that must clear through other local banks and are therefore sent 
to a local clearinghouse for processing, and they include those items that are sent to out-of-
 town banks, such as Federal Reserve Banks. Because tracking down these items will involve 
obtaining records from third-party banks, the tracing process might be more time 
consuming and will probably require legal process. 
 
To determine whether an item is an on-us item or a clearinghouse item, first look to see 
whether the bank on which the check was drawn is the same as the bank in which it was 
deposited. If the names are not the same, check the endorsements on the back of the check. 
If the item has a different bank’s endorsement or  a Federal Reserve bank’s endorsement, it is 
a clearinghouse item. The endorsement should contain the name of the processing bank or 
its transit number. 
 
Wire Transfers 
A wire transfer  is a method of transferring money from one bank to another. These transfers 
are processed by banks and by wire remittance companies such as Western Union and 
MoneyGram.  
 
Like other transactions, banks keep records of wire transfers. The records will identify who 
sent the wire, where it was sent, the date, and the amount. If the transfer was to a bank in 
the United States, the bank should have a record of the account number of the account into 
which the funds were deposited. If the wire was sent offshore, however, tracing the transfer 
depends on the laws and policies of the country and the receiving institution. 
 
Intrabank Transfers 
Other departments within a bank can credit the depositor’s account for funds collected, such 
as the proceeds of loans or items held by the bank for collection. Items held by the bank for 
collection are not always deposited to the customer’s account but are sometimes remitted 
directly to the customer. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.818   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Savings Accounts 
These are referred to as time deposits  because sometimes they are not as readily available to the 
customer as deposits to a checking account. Funds in a savings account might be subject to a 
30-day notice of withdrawal. 
 
Certificates of Deposit 
Certificates of deposit  (CDs) are interest bearing investment products that provide limited access 
to the money invested and a modest rate of interest. CDs are intended to be held until 
maturity, at which time the money may be withdrawn together with the accrued interest. 
Many banks impose penalties on money with drawn from a CD before maturity.  
 
Bank Statements 
A bank statement is a summary of all the transactions of a bank account. Bank statements 
are provided for all types of bank accounts, including checking accounts, money market 
accounts, savings accounts, CAP accounts (used by those who often deal in securities 
transactions), and others. 
 
Bank statements are helpful because they contain important information. In general, the 
details on a bank statement include the name and address of the bank, the name and address 
of the account holder, the account number, the opening balance, a record of all debit 
transactions (e.g., cash withdrawals from a teller, automated-teller machine (ATM) cash 
withdrawals, ATM payments, check payments, online payments, debit card payments, bank 
fees, etc.), a record of all credit transactions (e.g., direct transfers, cash deposits, check 
deposits, etc.), and the closing balance.  
 
Bank statements summarize the financial activity of the account holder for a specific period 
(usually a month). If a credit card is tied to the account, the bank statement also reflects 
credit card balances but usually not specific transactions.  
 
Today, bank statements are mailed to account holders or are accessible online. Some banks 
still return original checks along with the bank statements to the account holder; others 
provide pages with smaller facsimiles of the front and back of each check. 
 
Generally, bank statements contain a wealth of information. In most bank statements, 
financial activity in the account is shown along with a tied credit card balance. Typically, 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.819 
bank statements show numerous types of transactions, including checks, electronic checks, 
and electronic fund transfers, as they are charged against the account. 
 
Other Exchange Instruments 
Exchange instruments are vehicles by which the bank transfers funds, and these instruments 
include cashier’s checks, bank drafts, traveler ’s checks, bank money orders, and certified 
checks. Bank exchange instruments are often purchased with currency; therefore, they may 
be good sources of information about a subject’s currency transactions. 
 
CASHIER’S CHECKS 
Cashier’s checks  are issued and certified by a bank with itself as the drawer. These items are 
called treasurer’s checks when issued by a trust company. They are frequently an excellent 
lead to other bank accounts, stock, real property, and other assets. Because cashier’s checks 
can be held indefinitely, subjects sometimes purchase cashier’s checks instead of keeping 
large amounts of currency on hand. In reconstructing a subject’s transactions with cashier’s 
checks, be sure that all checks are accounted for because subjects sometimes exchange 
previously purchased checks for new ones.  
 
Bank checks, such as cashier’s checks, can be extremely time consuming and expensive to 
locate unless you know the date and number of the check. However, if the subject has 
deposited a bank check into his account, or purchased a bank check using a check from his 
account, then copies of bank checks are much easier to obtain because the subject’s account 
records will reveal the date and number of the bank check. 
 
BANK DRAFTS 
Bank drafts are checks drawn by the issuing bank on its account with another bank. Often 
this other account is in the geographical area where the purchaser desires to make a 
payment. Bank drafts also can be used when a subject does not want to carry a large amount 
of cash. 
 
TRAVELER’S CHECKS 
Traveler’s checks are checks issued in predetermined amounts by the American Express 
Company and several large U.S. banks. Local banks purchase them from issuing companies 
of U.S. banks and then sell them to the public. Traveler’s checks require two signatures of 
the purchaser: one when purchased and the other when cashed. Traveler’s checks are traced 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
by their serial number. The issuing company usually keeps records of traveler’s checks sent 
to it by the selling bank. Traveler’s checks do not expire. 
 
The local bank that sold the checks might keep a copy of the sales order that lists the serial 
numbers. If the numbers are not available, the issuing bank might be able to supply the 
information if it is known when the checks were purchased. Canceled checks can be 
obtained from the American Express Company or from other issuing banks. A target can 
purchase large amounts of traveler’s checks from one bank and place them in another to 
avoid arousing suspicion by depositing cash. 
 
It is important to note, however, that traveler’s checks are declining in use. According to the 
Federal Reserve, usage of traveler’s checks has declined each year since their peak in the mid 
1990s.  
 
BANK MONEY ORDERS 
Bank money orders are similar to cashier’s checks but usually are for small amounts. Like 
cashier’s checks, money orders may be resorted to by subjects reluctant to use cash. 
 
CERTIFIED CHECKS 
Certified checks  are customer’s checks stamped with the paying bank’s guarantee that the 
maker’s signature is genuine and that there is enough money available in the holder’s account  
to cover the amount to be paid.  Certified checks are liabilities of the bank and, when paid, 
are kept by the bank. These checks are immediately charged against the customer’s account 
by debit memorandums. Some banks permit customers to retrieve the original checks by 
surrendering the debit memorandum.  
 
Loan Records 
Loan records can provide important information regarding a subject. With loan records, the 
collateral that secures them, and the results of (bank) credit investigations, a bank has a 
wealth of information. When a bank makes a commercial loan to an individual, it requires 
detailed statements of assets and liabilities from the borrower. The loan file also might 
include the results of credit inquiries regarding paying habits, loan amounts, and present 
unpaid balances. A bank credit department generally maintains the following basic records: 
• The credit or loan file: This file includes the loan application, financial statement, and 
general economic history of the customer. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.821 
• The liability ledger : This contains the customer’s past and present liability to the bank. 
These sheets also contain information such as the loan date, note number, amount of the 
loan, interest rate, due date, and payments. 
• The collateral file: A complete description of the items pledged as security for loans. 
Records of such collateral can provide valuable information about a subject’s assets. 
 
Indications of unusual loans include loans in odd amounts or loans that were not deposited 
into the subject’s bank account. Loans that show unusual repayments also should be traced. 
Lump-sum payments and odd-amount payments are unusual. Accelerated payments or large 
pay-downs on the balance might indicate sudden wealth. 
 
Loan records also might reveal collusion between  the bank and the subject. For instance, if 
the records show that a loan repayment is long overdue or the loan has an extended rollover, 
collusion might exist. Also, loans made in contravention to the bank’s normal loan or a loan 
that appears to be in excess of the individual’s ability to repay suggests a “special 
relationship” between the bank and the subject. 
 
Loan proceeds might be deposited into hidden accounts, or hidden accounts might be used 
for loan payments. Loans might be secured by hidden assets or cosigned by previously 
unknown cohorts. Alternatively, the subject might have taken out the loan for someone else. 
Tracing the ultimate disposition of the proceeds will uncover those leads. 
 
Tracing the disposition of loan proceeds is similar to tracing deposit transactions. The 
proceeds could have been deposited within the bank into the subject’s account or someone 
else’s account, or they might be used to purchase a certificate of deposit. The funds might 
have been sent to the wire transfer department for transmittal to another bank. More 
commonly, the proceeds will be given to the customer in the form of a bank check. The 
bank should be able to trace the check to determine where it was deposited or cashed. The 
loan proceeds might have been used to finance an asset, the down payment for which came 
from illegal funds. Tracing the source of loan payments will provide some leads; for instance, 
the payments might be made from a previously unknown account. Payments made by a 
third-party might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme. 
 
The loan application should contain a financial statement, or its equivalent, on which the 
subject may identify other accounts and assets. The file might also contain tax returns, credit 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.822   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency reports, and notes of interviews by the loan officer. The security for the loan, if any, 
might be a hidden asset. 
 
MORTGAGE LOAN FILES 
Mortgage loan files often contain the most detailed financial statements submitted by the 
subject. The loan file should identify the title company that handled the closing, the 
homeowner’s insurance carrier, the closing attorney, and perhaps the real estate broker. The 
title company files often contain copies of the cashier’s checks used for the down payment, 
which can identify new accounts. 
 
The homeowner’s insurance policy might contain a rider that lists the homeowner’s valuable 
assets, such as jewelry or furs, perhaps with appraisals and purchase receipts. The closing 
attorney will have many of the same materials found in the title company files. The real 
estate broker might keep copies of personal checks used for deposits and provide 
information about other real estate transactions by the subjects. Don’t forget to look for 
accelerated or lump sum payments on the mortgage balance. 
 
CHECK CREDIT LOANS 
Check credit is another loan service that more and more banks are offering. Under a check 
credit plan, the bank agrees to extend credit to a customer up to a maximum amount. If the 
amount of the check is not in the customer’s a ccount, the resulting overdraft is set up as a 
loan. The bank then bills the customer for the loan. Another plan is a specialized checking 
account that is used only up to a predetermined amount under a loan agreement; the 
outstanding balance is treated as an installment loan by the bank. Copies of loan agreements 
and statements under both plans can be obtained from the bank files. 
 
Credit Card Records 
Banks are increasingly doing business in credit cards. Under bank credit card plans, the 
cardholder can charge purchases at stores, restaurants, and other places that agree to accept 
the charges. Under most plans, the cardholder can elect to pay the entire balance in one 
payment or to pay in installments under arrangements similar to a loan account.  
 
The credit card records that are important to the economic crime investigator are the 
application for a card and the bank’s copies of  monthly statements sent to the cardholder.  
Credit card applications require a considerable amount of financial information, and some of 
the information may be the same as that found on an application for a bank loan. In today’s 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.823 
environment, credit cards may be tied to bank accounts and may not require a separate 
application.  
 
Credit card statements also contain a great deal of important information. Generally, these 
statements contain the name of the credit card issuer, the cardholder’s account number, a 
summary of the transactions on the account, payment information, and a list of all the 
transactions that occurred during that months billing cycle (i.e., purchases, payments, credits, 
cash advances, and balance transfers). 
 
Bank Collection Department Records 
The bank’s collection department, which is normally involved in collecting amounts due on 
installment contracts and notes, can be used to collect personal checks (usually in large 
amounts and with special instructions), thus circumventing the normal record-keeping 
associated with checking accounts. Such a transaction will not be reflected on the target’s 
regular checking account statements but will appear in the collection department records. A 
copy of the check also will be microfilmed. 
 
Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Safe-deposit boxes are private vault spaces rented by banks to customers. Because state laws 
differ, the nature of the relationship varies between a bank and the safe-deposit box holders. 
Banks keep no record of safe-deposit box contents and rarely know what the boxes contain. 
The rental contract records identify the renters, the person or people who have access to the 
boxes, their signatures, and the dates of the original agreements and later renewals. They also 
might contain other identifying information, including the name of the initiating bank 
officer. The officer’s name could be significant if the subject (who might have used an alias 
in renting the box) must be identified. 
 
Records showing access to the boxes vary from bank to bank. But generally, they contain the 
signatures of the people entering the boxes and usually the dates and times of entry. The 
entry records are filed in box-number order. The frequency of entry and the times and dates 
of entries might be significant and might correspond to the times and dates of deposits or 
withdrawals from other accounts or to the purchases and sales of securities, property, and in 
other situations. 
 
Because the bank records will not show the contents of the box, the fraud examiner can 
request permission to inventory the box with the target present, carefully noting and 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
describing the exact contents (for example, legal description on deeds, numbers of insurance 
policies, etc.). 
 
Bank Secrecy Act Documents 
Under the Bank Secrecy Act, banks and other financial institutions are required to file 
Currency Transaction Reports, Suspicious Activity Reports, and other reports detailing large 
cash transactions or suspicious activity. (See the chapter on “Money Laundering” in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for a complete description of 
each report.) These reports will reflect the identity, address, and Social Security number of 
the person making the cash transaction, total amount, and certain other information. Some 
organizations are exempt from the filing requirement, including certain high-volume cash 
businesses, governmental agencies, and payroll account holders.  
 
Stock Brokerage Records 
Many stock brokerage houses now offer the same type of services as banks, such as check-
 writing privileges, credit cards, loans (against the value of securities held), as well as their 
normal securities business. All records pertaining to the subject should be requested; 
however, make sure that the request specifically includes the following: 
• Application: When a customer opens an account, he typically will fill out an account 
application that will contain personal and financial data, such as bank accounts. 
• Customer account cards:  This card is kept in the broker’s files for reference. It will include all 
transactions conducted for the customer. 
• Signature card: A signature card should be on file, which will show all those authorized to 
conduct transactions on the account. 
• Securities receipts:  These receipts are issued to a customer when he delivers securities to the 
broker for sale. 
• Cash receipts: These receipts are issued to a customer when he delivers currency to the 
broker. 
• Confirmation slips: These are issued to a customer to show the type of transaction (buy or 
sell) and the amount involved in the transaction. 
• Securities delivered receipt:  This receipt is signed by the customer when a securities purchase 
is delivered to the customer. 
• Brokerage account statement: This statement is usually issued monthly and provides 
information on all transactions conducted during the reporting period. It lists all 
purchases and sales, the name of the security, the number of units, the amount per unit, 
the total amount of the transaction, the account balance, payments received from the 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.825 
customer, disbursements to the customer, and the securities that are held by the 
brokerage firm for the customer. 
 
Concerning stock brokerage records, the examiner is primarily interested in the source of the 
funds used to purchase securities or deposited to a cash account. The subject’s monthly 
account statements, which are somewhat more complex than equivalent bank statements, 
reflect these transactions. They can be interpreted with the help of explanatory material on 
the statement or with the assistance of an employee of the firm. Receipts for stock purchases 
and deposits should reflect whether the payment was in currency or check and the ABA 
code of the bank on which the check was drawn. Brokerage checks issued to the subject 
from stock sale proceeds also should be examined, as these might be deposited directly to a 
new account or endorsed over and paid directly to third parties for the purchase of assets. 
 
Tax Returns and Related Documents 
Personal tax returns, if available, might provide indirect evidence of illicit payments, such as 
profits or losses from previously undisclosed business ventures, or interest and dividends on 
hidden CDs and bank accounts. The returns might also reveal deductions and expenses, 
such as real estate taxes, that can lead to previously unknown funds or assets. Commercial 
bribes are often reported as consulting fees or other miscellaneous income. The target’s 
accountant and tax preparer should also be interviewed, and their files and work papers 
subpoenaed, if possible. 
 
Establish a Database 
After obtaining the relevant financial records, the examiner should establish a database or 
spreadsheet for analysis. By placing the records into a standardized format, the fraud 
examiner will be more easily able to compare records, uncover patterns, and extract various 
representations of the data.  
 
Both spreadsheets and databases have benefits and drawbacks. The benefits of using 
spreadsheets include: (1) most individuals who work in the financial sector are familiar with 
spreadsheets; (2) spreadsheets allow data to be translated easily into bar, pie, and other 
graphic charts; (3) they allow data to be filtered and sorted easily; (4) and spreadsheets allow 
for the use of pivot tables to display data. Spreadsheets, however, are restricted to a limited 
number of records and may require a large amount of hard-drive space for data storage. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Conversely, databases are more effective than spreadsheets when dealing with large sets of 
records. Databases offer the following features: (1) data can be sorted and manipulated 
easily; (2) changes to records can automatically update queries and reports; and (3) relational 
tables and forms can be used to reduce data entry time. In some environments (such as 
Microsoft Office), data can be easily switched from a spreadsheet to a database, and vice 
versa, for ease of manipulation or display. 
 
Regardless of the type of program used, the information used is the same. The type of 
information retrieved from financial records is the data entered into the spreadsheet or 
database. Each column or field holds some type of information, and this information forms 
the basis for the columns used. As illustrated in the table below, there are 16 primary 
elements that can be pulled from banking records. An additional field for comments is added 
for miscellaneous data. 
 
1. Check number 9. Signatory 
2. Entity from 10. Account number from 
3. Bank from 11. Transaction type 
4. Date written 12. First endorser 
5. Payee 13. Transaction bank 
6. Amount written 14. Deposited to account 
7. Amount deposited 15. Date of transaction 
8. Memo written 16. Comments 
 17. Location 
 
Details on what goes into each of these fields are provided below: 
1. Check number : This field should contain the number of the financial instrument written on 
or deposited to the account. The following items, however, will not contain a check 
number: wire transaction, automated teller machine transaction, point-of-sale 
transaction, and debit memo. A deposited amount would include a check number unless 
the deposit was cash, an incoming wire, or a credit memo. 
2. Entity from : This field should contain the name of the company or person the check is 
from—the owner of the account on which the check is written.  
3. Bank from : This field should contain the name of the bank from which the check, debit 
memo, or wire transfer was issued. If desired, the ABA bank number can also be entered 
to identify the bank’s source of the funds. 
4. Date written : This field should contain the date the check was written, the transaction 
(e.g., wire transfer or debit memo) was generated, or the withdrawal was made. This is 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.827 
not the date shown on the bank statement; bank statements show the clearing dates—
 the dates that checks clear the bank. The clearing date can be used if no other dates are 
present (e.g., if there is no check copy provided by the bank, but the check is listed on 
the statement). 
5. Payee : This field should contain the name of the payee—the person or entity to whom 
the check was written.  
6. Amount written : This field should contain the amount written on the face of the check. If 
there is a discrepancy between the numerical and written amounts,  the bank will usually 
honor the written amount. Check the amount the bank has imprinted on the bottom 
right-hand side of the check in magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) to determine 
which amount the bank used. 
7. Deposited amount : This field should contain the amount of money credited to the bank 
account by a cash or check deposit, wire transfer, or credit memo. This amount is put 
into a field separate from the amount written for ease of separating, sorting, and adding 
the amounts. 
8. Memo : This field should contain any notation written on the “Memo” line or box on the 
check. 
9. Signatory : This field should contain the name of the person (or persons) who signed the 
check as the authorized signatory. When entering the data into this field, initials are 
sufficient if the person referenced is clear. 
10. Account number from : This field should contain the account number on which the check, 
debit memo, or wire transfer was written. 
11. Transaction type : This field should contain the type of transaction (e.g., check, transfer, 
wire, debit memo, credit memo, deposit, ATM deposit or withdrawal, or ATM 
purchase).  
12. First endorser : This field should contain the name of  the first endorser. The first endorser 
is the person or persons who endorsed the check (i.e., signed the check on the back as 
the endorser). On checks made out to a company,  the back of the check may be 
stamped with the company name, bank, and account number and no endorsing signature 
should be shown.  
13. Transaction bank : This field should contain the name of the bank the item was deposited 
to (or where the check was cashed). This could be the bank from which records have 
been subpoenaed, the bank stamped on the back of the check, or the bank at which the 
check was cashed. If the check was negotiated at a non-bank financial institution (e.g., 
check cashing agency, money transmitter, or casino), the name of that company can be 
placed here with other specifics entered in the “comments” field. 
14. Deposited to account : This field should contain the account number to which the check was 
deposited. It should be noted that some banks write the account number on the back of 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.828   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
checks when cashed; this serves as an identifier for the check casher. Therefore, a bank 
account number located on the back of a check may not mean that the check was 
deposited into that account. Remember to check the front of the check for a “cashed” 
stamp. 
15. Date of transaction : This field should contain the date the check was deposited or 
negotiated. 
16. Comments : The comments field is used for other comments about the transaction. NSF 
could be entered into the comments field to signify that there were non-sufficient funds 
to cover the check. Additional information about the endorser (e.g., driver’s license or 
alien registration number), the name of a secondary endorser, or notes written on the 
back of the check by the teller could also be placed in the comments field.  
1 7.  Location : This field should be used for transactions made at an automated teller machine 
or a point-of-sale if the location is important. 
 
There are three rules to follow when entering records into a spreadsheet or database:  
• Enter data as fully as possible 
• Be consistent in referring to entities 
• Have all records reviewed for accuracy 
 
Entering the data completely will help avoid having to enter data into the records a second 
time. In the past, some users of financial records entered the check and deposit data located 
on the statements first, and then entered the information from cancelled checks as the 
checks were obtained. This, however, should not be done. Although transactions that are 
found only on statements can be entered into the database, check and deposit data should be 
entered from the checks written and deposit slips.  
 
When inputting data, consistency is important. Even if check writers have not been 
consistent in their spelling or use of names, the entered data must be consisted. Otherwise, 
the sorting results will not be accurate. If, for example, a different version of a name is used, 
the various names can be placed in the comments field. 
 
Finally, all records entered should be double or triple-checked for accuracy. It is preferable 
that the review is conducted by someone who did not enter the data because it is hard to 
catch one’s own errors. For example, one way to check the amounts in a field is by tying 
them to the totals on the statements.  
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.829 



:


direct method of trace financi transact
a subject incom can be establish by the direct or indirect approach the direct
approach or the specificitem method of prove incom reli on specif transact
such as sale or expens to determin incom the indirect approach reli on
circumstanti proof of incom indirect method will be discuss in the next section
to trace financi transact us the direct method the examin must obtain relev
financi record
financi institut
fraud examin should recogn that in most instanc bank record ar not readili
obtain substanti requir usual must be met to justifi legal process eg
subpoena search warrant and the like which bank will customarili demand as a condit
for disclosur preliminari investig is of the utmost import to lai the basi for
obtain such record more inform on bank transact is contain in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
the avail of investig avenu often determin whether a promis fraud
examin will grind to a halt or proce successfulli legal advic from a prosecutor or
civil counsel should be sought in all such instanc it should also be recogn that bank
offici and employe can be question by fraud examin in the same manner as ani
other potenti wit and that their respons to proper inquiri might provid
import inform
bank record ar perhap the singl most import financi sourc avail to a fraud
examin in addit to their us as evid for fraud a bank record might provid lead
on sourc of fund expenditur and person affair
trace illicit transact investig
3806 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow inform can be of valu to fraud examin seek inform from
bank concern pertin financi transact of econom crime perpetr it is base
in part on the oper guidelin issu by the american banker associ to all
member bank in the unit state and on the train guid issu by the us
depart of the treasuri
type of financi institut
bank ar classifi primarili by their major servic
commerci bank offer busi and individu such servic as check account
loan and exchang instrument
save bank and save and loan associ handl save account and mortgag loan
trust compani handl properti for other under variou type of fiduciari
accommod
mani bank combin all three servic bank ar organ under either state or nation
bank law
the basic bank function ar as follow
receiv deposit
pai check
transfer fund
make loan
collect sundri financi instrument
hold and administ properti for other
perform other servic such as rent safe deposit box
intern bookkeep procedur
the intern recordkeep practic and procedur of bank not onli ar complex but
thei constantli ar chang becaus of the grow sophist of comput technolog
bank ar move steadili toward an electron fundstransf system that will elimin the
us of check such a system will automat transfer monei from the account of the
purchas to the account of the seller paper trail will disappear detail familiar with the
intricaci of intern bank oper is not essenti howev for the fraud examin to
obtain the type of inform necessari for investig what is essenti is the
knowledg that record of custom transact ar maintain and retain
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3807
electron bank
electron bank is possibl the most common form of bank todai electron bank
includ autom teller machin transact pointofsal transact us credit or
debit card smart card which ar gain popular in the us and ar alreadi popular in
europ wire transfer onlin bill payment through internet bank and biller websit
and tradit autom clear hous ach applic of direct payment and direct
deposit
all of these form of electron bank ar govern by the electron fund transfer act
efta 15 usc 1693 see appendix a the efta current requir financi
institut to keep record on all transact of 3000 or more
retent of record
the bank secreci act set forth a system of report and recordkeep requir
design to help track larg or unusu financi transact the act consist of two titl
titl i contain provis requir financi institut and secur broker and dealer
to keep extens record of the transact and account of their custom titl ii of the
act origin entitl currenc and foreign transact report act requir bank
financi institut which includ casino secur broker and dealer currenc
exchang and other and in some case individu to report certain transact to the
govern
titl irecordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c the recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang under these regul all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani
financi transact of more than 10000
these regul provid in part that bank must keep an origin microfilm or other
copi or reproduct of most demand deposit check account and save account
record must be retain for five year the record must includ signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw and copi of custom check s bank draft monei order and cashier
check drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
trace illicit transact investig
3808 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a
custom check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit
ticket thei must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check
deposit to a custom check account
although some of these requir appli to check written or deposit made in excess of
100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all pertin record includ the check and
deposit in amount less than 100 rather than sort their record into two categori the
bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a record of ani extens of
credit of more than 10000 as well as each tr ansfer of 10000 or more outsid the unit
state
titl iireport and recordkeep
titl ii of the bank secreci act is codifi as 31 usc 53115330 the purpos of
these section is to requir certain report or record to be file or kept by financi
institut section 5312a2 defin financi institut veri broadli to includ not
onli bank but also secur broker curr ncy exchang hous insur compani loan
compani travel agenc telegraph compani s issuer or cashier of check or monei
order auto boat and airplan dealer casino and person involv in real estat close
and settlement onli recent ha the treasuri depart begun to reign in much of the
nonfinanci institut transact busi in the by requir registr of these divers
enterpris
gain access to record held by financi institut
on of the most difficult challeng to the fraud examin will be to gain access to the
record held by financi institut although bank record ar on of the most import
sourc avail to fraud examin thei ar not readili obtain most suspect will
not willingli give their record to a fraud examin especi if the record contain
potenti incrimin evid
moreov financi institut author to di sclose bank record is restrict by feder
and state law for exampl the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut
from disclos financi inform about individu custom until the government
author obtain the custom consent a court order a subpoena a search warrant or
some other formal demand with limit except and even though right to financi
privaci act appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and other
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3809
financi institut also will not releas such inform to privat parti absent legal
process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
as a result substanti requir must gener be met befor bank will disclos such
inform in gener bank record can be obtain in most jurisdict by us on of
the follow method
civil discoveri
administr subpoena or summon
civil summon
custom author disclosur
court subpoena
grand juri subpoena
search warrant
furthermor the cost of obtain bank record can be quit high bank gener charg
both public and privat entiti to search and retriev record there ar usual addit
cost for the reproduct of record it might be prudent for the examin to limit record
request as much as possibl
despit such complic the examin might attempt to obtain the financi record of
suspect by contact their former spous former spous might have bank record
us to the fraud examin that thei mai be happi to turn over similarli the bank
record might also be a part of a divorc settlement or a lawsuit
type of financi record
the financi record identifi and discuss below ar limit to those of particular
interest to fraud examin
account open document
account open document includ the record requir to creat a bank account but the
type of file requir mai vari depend on the type of account
person account
signatur card ar the kei record requir to open and us a person account the
signatur card is the evid of a contract between the custom and bank when a
depositor open an account the bank requir that a signatur card be sign by sign the
trace illicit transact investig
3810 2011 fraud examin manual
card the depositor becom a parti to a contract with the bank under which he accept all
rule and regul of the bank and author the bank to honor hi order for
withdraw fund for a corpor or a partnership account the signatur card is
accompani by copi of resolut of the board of director or partnership agreement
name the person author to draw check on the account
the signatur card is a sourc of valuabl inform although it form vari the card
usual contain such data as bank connect and the date and amount of the initi
deposit the initi deposit trace through the bank record mai disclos a sourc of
incom the identif of the person who open the account might be signific
especi if the depositor us an alia
mani bank investig the refer give n by a new custom thei might also make
inquiri of variou credit report agenc thi inform is contain in a
correspond file or a credit file that can contain comment of the person who open the
account and might show inform given by the depositor when open the account
in bank us automat data process adp the signatur card also contain an
account number assign to the custom in trace inform about a subject
transact with the bank the account number must be us if it doe not appear on the
signatur card it can be locat in the bank crossrefer file assign account number
ar encod on other document relat to the depositor by mean of a system call
magnet ink charact recognit micr the card also might contain the depositor
social secur number
the signatur card might defin the account as either a regular or a special check account
the main differ between the two is the servic charg made by the bank the regular
check account is us mostli by busi and individu who maintain larg averag
balanc the special check account is us by individu who usual have small
account balanc
when request the signatur card the fraud examin should determin whether the bank
maintain ani type of central file most larg bank have a central file that list all
depart with which a custom ha had deal if the bank ha such a file the
examin doe not need to check with each depart to obtain inform the subject
might at on time have had a bank account that later wa close request for inform
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3811
from a bank about a subject should alwai includ a refer to both activ and close
account record of close account ar usual maintain in a separ file
in addit to a signatur card the accountopen file for a person account might
contain a copi of some form of identif eg driver licens the account holder
provid the bank
busi account
in addit to the document requir for open a person account the open
document for a corpor account will includ a copi of the corpor resolut
author the open of a bank account and possibl the compani articl of
incorpor these document should indic who the compani corpor offic ar
and it date of incorpor
for an unincorpor compani to open a bank account the bake institut might
requir the compani to provid a do busi as dba registr fictiti name
registr or busi registr certif gener the requir document
depend on the applic state law
negoti check
cancel check written by a subject or receiv from other provid the fraud examin
with much more than amount paye and endorse of particular interest ar check that
have been cash all bank us a seri of code or symbol imprint on the front of a
check to show that the check ha been cash the specif code us in variou area can
be obtain local
a us techniqu to help examin negoti check is to list the inform from the
check on a spreadsheet either manual or electron check should be list by number
and date on the left with the paye amount and purpos of the check if known to the
right thi will show the subject routin monthli or annual expenditur that can be us
for comput the compar net worth the absenc of a check for a recur payment
for a particular month might indic a cash payment which in turn would indic possibl
undisclos cash incom examin the back of check payabl to cash and note where thei
were cash the depositori stamp can identifi the bank at which the check wa cash
thi inform mai provid a lead to anoth bank account
trace illicit transact investig
3812 2011 fraud examin manual
check 21
with imag exchang and the emerg fraud detect technolog bank will be abl to
know if suffici fund ar in the account whether the custom is who he claim to be
and whether the check is legitim 6
in juli 2003 congress issu final regul regard the avail of fund and
collect of check these regul known as check 21 creat substitut check a
type of negoti instrument that becam the legal equival of paper check thi
provis facilit the effici collect and return of check in electron form by
allevi the collect requir that depositori bank actual send the origin paper
check to collect bank for payment
under check 21 a depositori bank can transfer check inform electron to a
collect bank via a substitut check for present the collect bank is then requir
to take present of the substitut check as long as it meet all the legal requir of
the origin check therefor rather than actual process and send an origin
paper check across citi and state the deposit bank can now collect the substitut
check electron
a substitut check is a paper reproduct of the origin check that state thi is a legal
copi of your check you can us it the same wai you would us the origin check upon
transfer present or return a bank warrant that the substitut check submit is an
accur depict of the physic check and that no depositori bank drawe drawer or
endors will be ask or requir to pai a check that ha alreadi been paid essenti thi
legend on the substitut check inform consum of their right to expedit recredit of
an amount charg if there is a disput item and the origin or substitut copi is
necessari to prove the valid of the charg on the account under thi law the valid of a
charg becom an issu when a consum is charg twice for a check the substitut check
is illeg or the origin check wa not properli copi dure the imag process
furthermor check 21 place the risk of loss associ with substitut check on the
reconvert bank that first transfer present or return the substitut check
6 robertson bill and ken gahr whitecollar crime fighter vol 6 no 1 check 21 blackjack for check fraud
fighter ridgefield ct white collar crime101 llc 2004
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3813
although the reconvert bank can alloc such loss among themselv thei mai remain
liabl under warranti claim indemn or recredit claim
trace check
trace check is facilit by the us of bank identif symbol fraud examin do
not have to understand the intern bookkeep procedur us by bank the concept of
bank identif symbol howev is of interest all check print for bank
institut contain an aba transit number these number repres an identif code
develop by the american banker associ the aba transit number enabl a check
to be rout to the bank of origin in the process of rout a trail is left
magnet ink charact recognit
magnet ink charact recognit micr is a machin languag and is a check design
standard to which all bank must conform numer inform is print in magnet ink
on the bottom of bank check and other document thi code is electron scan by
comput that convert the magnet ink notat into electron impuls readabl by a
comput micr inform is print in group call field the first field on the left
on bank check is the feder reserv check rout code and the next is the aba transit
number these number also appear in the upper right corner of the check
the account number field show the drawer assign account number at the bank when
the check is process through the bank an addit field is ad on the right for the
amount of the check the dollar amount of the check should alwai equal the encod
micr amount these two figur should be compar to make sure that the subject did not
alter the return check all check draft and similar item that ar not encod with
magnet ink cannot be clear through the feder reserv system without special handl
prefix number of citi in numer order
when the aba establish the citi and state prefix number system it did so by the
geograph locat of the reserv citi in exist at the time the prefix number
identifi citi and state document for exampl number 1 through 49 as seen in the
follow exampl were given to the most popul reserv citi and major bank
center at the time the rest of the number 50 through 99 were assign to the state from
east to west the princip number 50 60 70 80 and 90 were given to the main collect
financi center new york pennsylvania illi noi missouri and california the number
befor and after each princip number were gener design to nearbi state
trace illicit transact investig
3814 2011 fraud examin manual
prefix number of citi and state
149 reserv citi
5099 state
5058 eastern state
59 alaska american samoa guam hawaii puerto rico and the virgin island
6069 southeastern state
7079 central state
8088 southwestern state
9099 western state
reserv citi major bank center and state prefix number
1 new york ny 34 tacoma wa 68 virginia
2 chicago il 35 houston tx 69 west virginia
3 philadelphia pa 36 st joseph mo 70 illinoi
4 st loui mo 37 fort worth tx 71 indiana
5 boston ma 38 savannah ga 72 iowa
6 cleveland oh 39 oklahoma citi ok 73 kentucki
7 baltimor md 40 wichita ks 74 michigan
8 pittsburgh pa 41 sioux citi ia 75 minnesota
9 detroit mi 43 lincoln ne 76 nebraska
10 buffalo ny 44 topeka ks 77 north dakota
11 san francisco ca 45 dubuqu ia 78 south dakota
12 milwauke wi 46 galveston tx 79 wisconsin
13 cincinnati oh 47 cedar rapid ia 80 missouri
14 new orlean la 48 waco tx 81 arkansa
15 washington dc 49 muskoge ok 82 colorado
16 lo angel ca 50 new york 83 kansa
17 minneapoli mn 51 connecticut 84 louisiana
18 kansa citi mo 52 main 85 mississippi
19 seattl wa 53 massachusett 86 oklahoma
20 indianapoli in 54 new hampshir 87 tennesse
21 louisvil ky 55 new jersei 88 texa
22 st paul mn 56 ohio 89
23 denver co 57 rhode island 90 california
24 portland or 58 vermont 91 arizona
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3815
25 columbu oh 59 al as gu hi pr vi 7 92 idaho
26 memphi tn 60 pennsylvania 93 montana
27 omaha ne 61 alabama 94 nevada
28 spokan wa 62 delawar 95 new mexico
29 albani ny 63 florida 96 oregon
30 san antonio tx 64 georgia 97 utah
31 salt lake citi ut 65 maryland 98 washington
32 dalla tx 66 north carolina 99 wyom
all bank in an area serv by a feder reserv bank or branch carri the rout symbol of
the feder reserv bank or branch the feder reserv rout symbol frr
encompass the first four digit of the ninedigit rout number thi rout symbol
identifi where the feder reserv bank is locat the first two number of the frr
design the feder reserv district in which the bank is locat as shown below the 12
feder reserv district and number ar as follow
01boston ma
02new york ny
03philadelphia pa
04cleveland oh
05richmond va
06atlanta ga
07chicago il
08st loui mo
09minneapoli mn
10kansa citi ks
11dalla tx
12san francisco ca
the next two number design the specif bank locat of the feder reserv branch a
thrift institut is design when 2 is ad to the first digit of the frr for exampl
if there is a thrift institut in the first district boston the design would be 21 if
the thrift institut is in a district that ha a doubl digit such as san francisco the
design becom 32 the next four number of the rout number sequenc ar
7 al alaska as american samoa gu guam hi hawaii pr puerto rico vi virgin island
trace illicit transact investig
3816 2011 fraud examin manual
alwai uniqu to the financi institut and the last number of the nine digit rout
number is a digit deriv from an algorithm calcul
deposit ticket
the deposit ticket is the princip sourc document for credit the custom account
deposit ar first record on the deposit ticket or slip that usual segreg currenc
coin and check the check ar list separ in mani local the depositor write
the aba number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket either of
these might help to identifi the sourc of the check in other local the bank write the
aba number on the deposit ticket and in some bank no identifi data is enter on the
deposit ticket regardless of the detail contain on a deposit ticket bank recordkeep
system allow deposit to be identifi and trace to their sourc
in work with deposit ticket the fraud examin must rememb that sometim the
depositor split the deposit mean onli part of the check is actual deposit in these
instanc the custom either receiv cash or request that part of the proce be appli
to a note or interest due to the bank in some instanc it might be import to determin
the total amount of cash and check present for deposit befor deduct when thi is
the case the fraud examin should inquir from the bank how split deposit ar handl
deposit item can be broken down into two type onu item and clearinghous item
onu item
an onu item is a check or draft that is present for payment where the depositori bank is
also the payor bank for exampl a check written by a custom of on bank is deposit by
the paye at anoth branch of the same bank the bank should be abl to trace the sourc
of ani onu item the sourc might be loan proce certif of deposit wire transfer
bank check or check from other deposit at that bank if the deposit is the proce from
a loan obtain and analyz the loan file examin of the loan file is discuss later in thi
chapter if the deposit came from a wire transfer trace the wire transfer to the origin
bank to see where the fund for the wire transfer origin thi search could lead to other
account other wit coconspir or offshor transact
bank check such as cashier check and monei order could be an indic of smurf
oper smurf is the process by which a subject structur a deposit into sever
transact each less than 10000 to avoid file a currenc transact report as requir
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3817
under the bank secreci act as the video portion of thi cours make clear smurf is a
veri common techniqu for avoid report requir look for larg number of
cashier check in even amount deposit on a regular basi
clearinghous item
clearinghous item ar those that must clear through other local bank and ar therefor sent
to a local clearinghous for process and thei includ those item that ar sent to outof
town bank such as feder reserv bank becaus track down these item will involv
obtain record from thirdparti bank the trace process might be more time
consum and will probabl requir legal process
to determin whether an item is an onu item or a clearinghous item first look to see
whether the bank on which the check wa drawn is the same as the bank in which it wa
deposit if the name ar not the same check the endors on the back of the check
if the item ha a differ bank endors or a feder reserv bank endors it is
a clearinghous item the endors should contain the name of the process bank or
it transit number
wire transfer
a wire transfer is a method of transfer monei from on bank to anoth these transfer
ar process by bank and by wire remitt compani such as western union and
moneygram
like other transact bank keep record of wire transfer the record will identifi who
sent the wire where it wa sent the date and the amount if the transfer wa to a bank in
the unit state the bank should have a record of the account number of the account into
which the fund were deposit if the wire wa sent offshor howev trace the transfer
depend on the law and polici of the countri and the receiv institut
intrabank transfer
other depart within a bank can credit the depositor account for fund collect such
as the proce of loan or item held by the bank for collect item held by the bank for
collect ar not alwai deposit to the custom account but ar sometim remit
directli to the custom
trace illicit transact investig
3818 2011 fraud examin manual
save account
these ar refer to as time deposit becaus sometim thei ar not as readili avail to the
custom as deposit to a check account fund in a save account might be subject to a
30dai notic of withdraw
certif of deposit
certif of deposit cd ar interest bear invest product that provid limit access
to the monei invest and a modest rate of interest cd ar intend to be held until
matur at which time the monei mai be withdrawn togeth with the accru interest
mani bank impos penalti on monei with drawn from a cd befor matur
bank statement
a bank statement is a summari of all the transact of a bank account bank statement
ar provid for all type of bank account includ check account monei market
account save account cap account us by those who often deal in secur
transact and other
bank statement ar help becaus thei contain import inform in gener the
detail on a bank statement includ the name and address of the bank the name and address
of the account holder the account number the open balanc a record of all debit
transact eg cash withdraw from a teller automatedtel machin atm cash
withdraw atm payment check payment onlin payment debit card payment bank
fee etc a record of all credit transact eg direct transfer cash deposit check
deposit etc and the close balanc
bank statement summar the financi activ of the account holder for a specif period
usual a month if a credit card is ti to the account the bank statement also reflect
credit card balanc but usual not specif transact
todai bank statement ar mail to account holder or ar access onlin some bank
still return origin check along with the bank statement to the account holder other
provid page with smaller facsimil of the front and back of each check
gener bank statement contain a wealth of inform in most bank statement
financi activ in the account is shown along with a ti credit card balanc typic
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3819
bank statement show numer type of transact includ check electron check
and electron fund transfer as thei ar charg against the account
other exchang instrument
exchang instrument ar vehicl by which the bank transfer fund and these instrument
includ cashier check bank draft travel s check bank monei order and certifi
check bank exchang instrument ar often purchas with currenc therefor thei mai
be good sourc of inform about a subject currenc transact
cashier check
cashier check ar issu and certifi by a bank with itself as the drawer these item ar
call treasur check when issu by a trust compani thei ar frequent an excel
lead to other bank account stock real properti and other asset becaus cashier check
can be held indefinit subject sometim purchas cashier check instead of keep
larg amount of currenc on hand in reconstruct a subject transact with cashier
check be sure that all check ar account for becaus subject sometim exchang
previous purchas check for new on
bank check such as cashier check can be extrem time consum and expens to
locat unless you know the date and number of the check howev if the subject ha
deposit a bank check into hi account or purchas a bank check us a check from hi
account then copi of bank check ar much easier to obtain becaus the subject account
record will reveal the date and number of the bank check
bank draft
bank draft ar check drawn by the issu bank on it account with anoth bank often
thi other account is in the geograph area where the purchas desir to make a
payment bank draft also can be us when a subject doe not want to carri a larg amount
of cash
travel check
travel check ar check issu in predetermin amount by the american express
compani and sever larg us bank local bank purchas them from issu compani
of us bank and then sell them to the public travel check requir two signatur of
the purchas on when purchas and the other when cash travel check ar trace
trace illicit transact investig
3820 2011 fraud examin manual
by their serial number the issu compani usual keep record of travel check sent
to it by the sell bank travel check do not expir
the local bank that sold the check might keep a copi of the sale order that list the serial
number if the number ar not avail the issu bank might be abl to suppli the
inform if it is known when the check were purchas cancel check can be
obtain from the american express compani or from other issu bank a target can
purchas larg amount of travel check from on bank and place them in anoth to
avoid arous suspicion by deposit cash
it is import to note howev that travel check ar declin in us accord to the
feder reserv usag of travel check ha declin each year sinc their peak in the mid
1990
bank monei order
bank monei order ar similar to cashier check but usual ar for small amount like
cashier check monei order mai be resort to by subject reluct to us cash
certifi check
certifi check ar custom check stamp with the pai bank guarante that the
maker signatur is genuin and that there is enough monei avail in the holder account
to cover the amount to be paid certifi check ar liabil of the bank and when paid
ar kept by the bank these check ar immedi charg against the custom account
by debit memorandum some bank permit custom to retriev the origin check by
surrend the debit memorandum
loan record
loan record can provid import inform regard a subject with loan record the
collater that secur them and the result of bank credit investig a bank ha a
wealth of inform when a bank make a commerci loan to an individu it requir
detail statement of asset and liabil from the borrow the loan file also might
includ the result of credit inquiri regard pai habit loan amount and present
unpaid balanc a bank credit depart gener maintain the follow basic record
the credit or loan file thi file includ the loan applic financi statement and
gener econom histori of the custom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3821
the liabil ledger thi contain the custom past and present liabil to the bank
these sheet also contain inform such as the loan date note number amount of the
loan interest rate due date and payment
the collater file a complet descript of the item pledg as secur for loan
record of such collater can provid valuabl inform about a subject asset
indic of unusu loan includ loan in odd amount or loan that were not deposit
into the subject bank account loan that show unusu repay also should be trace
lumpsum payment and oddamount payment ar unusu acceler payment or larg
paydown on the balanc might indic sudden wealth
loan record also might reveal collus between the bank and the subject for instanc if
the record show that a loan repay is long overdu or the loan ha an extend rollov
collus might exist also loan made in contravent to the bank normal loan or a loan
that appear to be in excess of the individu abil to repai suggest a special
relationship between the bank and the subject
loan proce might be deposit into hidden account or hidden account might be us
for loan payment loan might be secur by hidden asset or cosign by previous
unknown cohort altern the subject might have taken out the loan for someon els
trace the ultim disposit of the proce will uncov those lead
trace the disposit of loan proce is similar to trace deposit transact the
proce could have been deposit within the bank into the subject account or someon
els account or thei might be us to purchas a certif of deposit the fund might
have been sent to the wire transfer depart for transmitt to anoth bank more
commonli the proce will be given to the custom in the form of a bank check the
bank should be abl to trace the check to determin where it wa deposit or cash the
loan proce might have been us to financ an asset the down payment for which came
from illeg fund trace the sourc of loan payment will provid some lead for instanc
the payment might be made from a previous unknown account payment made by a
thirdparti might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme
the loan applic should contain a financi statement or it equival on which the
subject mai identifi other account and asset the file might also contain tax return credit
trace illicit transact investig
3822 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc report and note of interview by the loan offic the secur for the loan if ani
might be a hidden asset
mortgag loan file
mortgag loan file often contain the most detail financi statement submit by the
subject the loan file should identifi the titl compani that handl the close the
homeown insur carrier the close attornei and perhap the real estat broker the
titl compani file often contain copi of the cashier check us for the down payment
which can identifi new account
the homeown insur polici might contain a rider that list the homeown valuabl
asset such as jewelri or fur perhap with apprais and purchas receipt the close
attornei will have mani of the same materi found in the titl compani file the real
estat broker might keep copi of person check us for deposit and provid
inform about other real estat transact by the subject dont forget to look for
acceler or lump sum payment on the mortgag balanc
check credit loan
check credit is anoth loan servic that more and more bank ar offer under a check
credit plan the bank agre to extend credit to a custom up to a maximum amount if the
amount of the check is not in the custom a ccount the result overdraft is set up as a
loan the bank then bill the custom for the loan anoth plan is a special check
account that is us onli up to a predetermin amount under a loan agreement the
outstand balanc is treat as an instal loan by the bank copi of loan agreement
and statement under both plan can be obtain from the bank file
credit card record
bank ar increasingli do busi in credit card under bank credit card plan the
cardhold can charg purchas at store restaur and other place that agre to accept
the charg under most plan the cardhold can elect to pai the entir balanc in on
payment or to pai in instal under arrang similar to a loan account
the credit card record that ar import to the econom crime investig ar the
applic for a card and the bank copi of monthli statement sent to the cardhold
credit card applic requir a consider amount of financi inform and some of
the inform mai be the same as that found on an applic for a bank loan in todai
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3823
environ credit card mai be ti to bank account and mai not requir a separ
applic
credit card statement also contain a great deal of import inform gener these
statement contain the name of the credit card issuer the cardhold account number a
summari of the transact on the account payment inform and a list of all the
transact that occur dure that month bill cycl ie purchas payment credit
cash advanc and balanc transfer
bank collect depart record
the bank collect depart which is normal involv in collect amount due on
instal contract and note can be us to collect person check usual in larg
amount and with special instruct thu circumv the normal recordkeep
associ with check account such a transact will not be reflect on the target
regular check account statement but will appear in the collect depart record a
copi of the check also will be microfilm
safedeposit box record
safedeposit box ar privat vault space rent by bank to custom becaus state law
differ the natur of the relationship vari between a bank and the safedeposit box holder
bank keep no record of safedeposit box content and rare know what the box contain
the rental contract record identifi the renter the person or peopl who have access to the
box their signatur and the date of the origin agreement and later renew thei also
might contain other identifi inform includ the name of the initi bank
offic the offic name could be signific if the subject who might have us an alia
in rent the box must be identifi
record show access to the box vari from bank to bank but gener thei contain the
signatur of the peopl enter the box and usual the date and time of entri the
entri record ar file in boxnumb order the frequenc of entri and the time and date
of entri might be signific and might correspond to the time and date of deposit or
withdraw from other account or to the purchas and sale of secur properti and in
other situat
becaus the bank record will not show the content of the box the fraud examin can
request permiss to inventori the box with the target present carefulli note and
trace illicit transact investig
3824 2011 fraud examin manual
describ the exact content for exampl legal descript on deed number of insur
polici etc
bank secreci act document
under the bank secreci act bank and other financi institut ar requir to file
currenc transact report suspici activ report and other report detail larg
cash transact or suspici activ see the chapter on monei launder in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual for a complet descript of
each report these report will reflect the ident address and social secur number of
the person make the cash transact total amount and certain other inform some
organ ar exempt from the file requir includ certain highvolum cash
busi government agenc and payrol account holder
stock brokerag record
mani stock brokerag hous now offer the same type of servic as bank such as check
write privileg credit card loan against the valu of secur held as well as their
normal secur busi all record pertain to the subject should be request
howev make sure that the request specif includ the follow
applic when a custom open an account he typic will fill out an account
applic that will contain person and financi data such as bank account
custom account card thi card is kept in the broker file for refer it will includ all
transact conduct for the custom
signatur card a signatur card should be on file which will show all those author to
conduct transact on the account
secur receipt these receipt ar issu to a custom when he deliv secur to the
broker for sale
cash receipt these receipt ar issu to a custom when he deliv currenc to the
broker
confirm slip these ar issu to a custom to show the type of transact bui or
sell and the amount involv in the transact
secur deliv receipt thi receipt is sign by the custom when a secur purchas
is deliv to the custom
brokerag account statement thi statement is usual issu monthli and provid
inform on all transact conduct dure the report period it list all
purchas and sale the name of the secur the number of unit the amount per unit
the total amount of the transact the account balanc payment receiv from the
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3825
custom disburs to the custom and the secur that ar held by the
brokerag firm for the custom
concern stock brokerag record the examin is primarili interest in the sourc of the
fund us to purchas secur or deposit to a cash account the subject monthli
account statement which ar somewhat more complex than equival bank statement
reflect these transact thei can be interpret with the help of explanatori materi on
the statement or with the assist of an employe of the firm receipt for stock purchas
and deposit should reflect whether the payment wa in currenc or check and the aba
code of the bank on which the check wa drawn brokerag check issu to the subject
from stock sale proce also should be examin as these might be deposit directli to a
new account or endors over and paid directli to third parti for the purchas of asset
tax return and relat document
person tax return if avail might provid indirect evid of illicit payment such as
profit or loss from previous undisclos busi ventur or interest and dividend on
hidden cd and bank account the return might also reveal deduct and expens
such as real estat tax that can lead to previous unknown fund or asset commerci
bribe ar often report as consult fee or other miscellan incom the target
account and tax prepar should also be interview and their file and work paper
subpoena if possibl
establish a databas
after obtain the relev financi record the examin should establish a databas or
spreadsheet for analysi by place the record into a standard format the fraud
examin will be more easili abl to compar record uncov pattern and extract variou
represent of the data
both spreadsheet and databas have benefit and drawback the benefit of us
spreadsheet includ 1 most individu who work in the financi sector ar familiar with
spreadsheet 2 spreadsheet allow data to be translat easili into bar pie and other
graphic chart 3 thei allow data to be filter and sort easili 4 and spreadsheet allow
for the us of pivot tabl to displai data spreadsheet howev ar restrict to a limit
number of record and mai requir a larg amount of harddriv space for data storag
trace illicit transact investig
3826 2011 fraud examin manual
convers databas ar more effect than spreadsheet when deal with larg set of
record databas offer the follow featur 1 data can be sort and manipul
easili 2 chang to record can automat updat queri and report and 3 relat
tabl and form can be us to reduc data entri time in some environ such as
microsoft offic data can be easili switch from a spreadsheet to a databas and vice
versa for eas of manipul or displai
regardless of the type of program us the inform us is the same the type of
inform retriev from financi record is the data enter into the spreadsheet or
databas each column or field hold some type of inform and thi inform form
the basi for the column us as illustr in the tabl below there ar 16 primari
element that can be pull from bank record an addit field for comment is ad
for miscellan data
1 check number 9 signatori
2 entiti from 10 account number from
3 bank from 11 transact type
4 date written 12 first endors
5 paye 13 transact bank
6 amount written 14 deposit to account
7 amount deposit 15 date of transact
8 memo written 16 comment
17 locat
detail on what goe into each of these field ar provid below
1 check number thi field should contain the number of the financi instrument written on
or deposit to the account the follow item howev will not contain a check
number wire transact autom teller machin transact pointofsal
transact and debit memo a deposit amount would includ a check number unless
the deposit wa cash an incom wire or a credit memo
2 entiti from thi field should contain the name of the compani or person the check is
fromth owner of the account on which the check is written
3 bank from thi field should contain the name of the bank from which the check debit
memo or wire transfer wa issu if desir the aba bank number can also be enter
to identifi the bank sourc of the fund
4 date written thi field should contain the date the check wa written the transact
eg wire transfer or debit memo wa gener or the withdraw wa made thi is
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3827
not the date shown on the bank statement bank statement show the clear date
the date that check clear the bank the clear date can be us if no other date ar
present eg if there is no check copi provid by the bank but the check is list on
the statement
5 paye thi field should contain the name of the payeeth person or entiti to whom
the check wa written
6 amount written thi field should contain the amount written on the face of the check if
there is a discrep between the numer and written amount the bank will usual
honor the written amount check the amount the bank ha imprint on the bottom
righthand side of the check in magnet ink charact recognit micr to determin
which amount the bank us
7 deposit amount thi field should contain the amount of monei credit to the bank
account by a cash or check deposit wire transfer or credit memo thi amount is put
into a field separ from the amount written for eas of separ sort and ad
the amount
8 memo thi field should contain ani notat written on the memo line or box on the
check
9 signatori thi field should contain the name of the person or person who sign the
check as the author signatori when enter the data into thi field initi ar
suffici if the person referenc is clear
10 account number from thi field should contain the account number on which the check
debit memo or wire transfer wa written
11 transact type thi field should contain the type of transact eg check transfer
wire debit memo credit memo deposit atm deposit or withdraw or atm
purchas
12 first endors thi field should contain the name of the first endors the first endors
is the person or person who endors the check ie sign the check on the back as
the endors on check made out to a compani the back of the check mai be
stamp with the compani name bank and account number and no endors signatur
should be shown
13 transact bank thi field should contain the name of the bank the item wa deposit
to or where the check wa cash thi could be the bank from which record have
been subpoena the bank stamp on the back of the check or the bank at which the
check wa cash if the check wa negoti at a nonbank financi institut eg
check cash agenc monei transmitt or casino the name of that compani can be
place here with other specif enter in the comment field
14 deposit to account thi field should contain the account number to which the check wa
deposit it should be note that some bank write the account number on the back of
trace illicit transact investig
3828 2011 fraud examin manual
check when cash thi serv as an identifi for the check casher therefor a bank
account number locat on the back of a check mai not mean that the check wa
deposit into that account rememb to check the front of the check for a cash
stamp
15 date of transact thi field should contain the date the check wa deposit or
negoti
16 comment the comment field is us for other comment about the transact nsf
could be enter into the comment field to signifi that there were nonsuffici fund
to cover the check addit inform about the endors eg driver licens or
alien registr number the name of a secondari endors or note written on the
back of the check by the teller could also be place in the comment field
1 7 locat thi field should be us for transact made at an autom teller machin
or a pointofsal if the locat is import
there ar three rule to follow when enter record into a spreadsheet or databas
enter data as fulli as possibl
be consist in refer to entiti
have all record review for accuraci
enter the data complet will help avoid have to enter data into the record a second
time in the past some user of financi record enter the check and deposit data locat
on the statement first and then enter the inform from cancel check as the
check were obtain thi howev should not be done although transact that ar
found onli on statement can be enter into the databas check and deposit data should be
enter from the check written and deposit slip
when input data consist is import even if check writer have not been
consist in their spell or us of name the enter data must be consist otherwis
the sort result will not be accur if for exampl a differ version of a name is us
the variou name can be place in the comment field
final all record enter should be doubl or triplecheck for accuraci it is prefer
that the review is conduct by someon who did not enter the data becaus it is hard to
catch on own error for exampl on wai to check the amount in a field is by ty
them to the total on the statement
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3829
