2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Financial Institutions


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Financial Institutions 
Fraud examiners should recognize that in most instances bank records are not readily 
obtainable. Substantial requirements usually must be met to justify legal process (e.g., 
subpoena, search warrant, and the like), which banks will customarily demand as a condition 
for disclosure. Preliminary investigation is of the utmost importance to lay the basis for 
obtaining such records. More information on banking transactions is contained in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
The availability of investigative avenues often determines whether a promising fraud 
examination will grind to a halt or proceed successfully. Legal advice from a prosecutor or 
civil counsel should be sought in all such instances. It should also be recognized that bank 
officials and employees can be questioned by fraud examiners in the same manner as any 
other potential witnesses and that their responses to proper inquiries might provide 
important information. 
 
Bank records are perhaps the single most important financial source available to a fraud 
examiner. In addition to their use as evidence for fraud, a bank’s records might provide leads 
on sources of funds, expenditures, and personal affairs. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following information can be of value to fraud examiners seeking information from 
banks concerning pertinent financial transactions of economic crime perpetrators. It is based 
in part on the operational guidelines issued by the American Bankers Association to all 
member banks in the United States and on the training guides issued by the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury. 
 



:


financi institut
fraud examin should recogn that in most instanc bank record ar not readili
obtain substanti requir usual must be met to justifi legal process eg
subpoena search warrant and the like which bank will customarili demand as a condit
for disclosur preliminari investig is of the utmost import to lai the basi for
obtain such record more inform on bank transact is contain in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
the avail of investig avenu often determin whether a promis fraud
examin will grind to a halt or proce successfulli legal advic from a prosecutor or
civil counsel should be sought in all such instanc it should also be recogn that bank
offici and employe can be question by fraud examin in the same manner as ani
other potenti wit and that their respons to proper inquiri might provid
import inform
bank record ar perhap the singl most import financi sourc avail to a fraud
examin in addit to their us as evid for fraud a bank record might provid lead
on sourc of fund expenditur and person affair
trace illicit transact investig
3806 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow inform can be of valu to fraud examin seek inform from
bank concern pertin financi transact of econom crime perpetr it is base
in part on the oper guidelin issu by the american banker associ to all
member bank in the unit state and on the train guid issu by the us
depart of the treasuri
