2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Account Opening Documents


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Account Opening Documents 
Account opening documents include the records required to create a bank account, but the 
types of files required may vary depending on the type of account. 
 
PERSONAL ACCOUNTS 
Signature cards are the key records required to open and use a personal account. The 
signature card is the evidence of a contract between the customer and bank. When a 
depositor opens an account, the bank requires that a signature card be signed. By signing the 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.810   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
card, the depositor becomes a party to a contract with the bank under which he accepts all 
rules and regulations of the bank and authorizes the bank to honor his orders for 
withdrawing funds. For a corporation or a partnership account, the signature card is 
accompanied by copies of resolutions of the board of directors or partnership agreements 
naming the person authorized to draw checks on the accounts. 
 
The signature card is a source of valuable information. Although its form varies, the card 
usually contains such data as banking connections and the date and amount of the initial 
deposit. The initial deposit traced through the bank’s records may disclose a source of 
income. The identification of the person who opened the account might be significant, 
especially if the depositor used an alias. 
 
Many banks investigate the references give n by a new customer. They might also make 
inquiries of various credit reporting agencies. This information is contained in a 
correspondence file or a credit file that can contain comments of the person who opened the 
account and might show information given by the depositor when opening the account. 
 
In banks using Automatic Data Processing (ADP), the signature card also contains an 
account number assigned to the customer. In tracing information about a subject’s 
transactions with the bank, the account number must be used. If it does not appear on the 
signature card, it can be located in the bank’s cross-reference file. Assigned account numbers 
are encoded on other documents relating to the depositor by means of a system called 
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR). The card also might contain the depositor’s 
Social Security number. 
 
The signature card might define the account as either a regular or a special checking account. 
The main difference between the two is the service charge made by the bank. The regular 
checking account is used mostly by businesses and individuals who maintain large average 
balances. The special checking account is used by individuals who usually have small  
account balances. 
 
When requesting the signature card, the fraud examiner should determine whether the bank 
maintains any type of central file. Most large banks have a central file that lists all 
departments with which a customer has had dealings. If the bank has such a file, the 
examiner does not need to check with each department to obtain information. The subject 
might at one time have had a bank account that later was closed. Requests for information 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.811 
from a bank about a subject should always include a reference to both active and closed 
accounts. Records of closed accounts are usually maintained in a separate file. 
 
In addition to a signature card, the account-opening file for a personal account might 
contain a copy of some form of identification (e.g., driver’s license) the account holder 
provided the bank. 
 
BUSINESS ACCOUNTS 
In addition to the documentation required for opening a personal account, the opening 
documents for a corporate account will include a copy of the corporate resolution 
authorizing the opening of a bank account and possibly the company’s articles of 
incorporation. These documents should indicate who the company’s corporate officers are 
and its date of incorporation.  
 
For an unincorporated company to open a bank account, the baking institution might 
require the company to provide a doing business as (DBA) registration, fictitious name 
registration, or business registration certificate. Generally, the required documentation 
depends on the applicable state laws. 
 



:


account open document
account open document includ the record requir to creat a bank account but the
type of file requir mai vari depend on the type of account
person account
signatur card ar the kei record requir to open and us a person account the
signatur card is the evid of a contract between the custom and bank when a
depositor open an account the bank requir that a signatur card be sign by sign the
trace illicit transact investig
3810 2011 fraud examin manual
card the depositor becom a parti to a contract with the bank under which he accept all
rule and regul of the bank and author the bank to honor hi order for
withdraw fund for a corpor or a partnership account the signatur card is
accompani by copi of resolut of the board of director or partnership agreement
name the person author to draw check on the account
the signatur card is a sourc of valuabl inform although it form vari the card
usual contain such data as bank connect and the date and amount of the initi
deposit the initi deposit trace through the bank record mai disclos a sourc of
incom the identif of the person who open the account might be signific
especi if the depositor us an alia
mani bank investig the refer give n by a new custom thei might also make
inquiri of variou credit report agenc thi inform is contain in a
correspond file or a credit file that can contain comment of the person who open the
account and might show inform given by the depositor when open the account
in bank us automat data process adp the signatur card also contain an
account number assign to the custom in trace inform about a subject
transact with the bank the account number must be us if it doe not appear on the
signatur card it can be locat in the bank crossrefer file assign account number
ar encod on other document relat to the depositor by mean of a system call
magnet ink charact recognit micr the card also might contain the depositor
social secur number
the signatur card might defin the account as either a regular or a special check account
the main differ between the two is the servic charg made by the bank the regular
check account is us mostli by busi and individu who maintain larg averag
balanc the special check account is us by individu who usual have small
account balanc
when request the signatur card the fraud examin should determin whether the bank
maintain ani type of central file most larg bank have a central file that list all
depart with which a custom ha had deal if the bank ha such a file the
examin doe not need to check with each depart to obtain inform the subject
might at on time have had a bank account that later wa close request for inform
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3811
from a bank about a subject should alwai includ a refer to both activ and close
account record of close account ar usual maintain in a separ file
in addit to a signatur card the accountopen file for a person account might
contain a copi of some form of identif eg driver licens the account holder
provid the bank
busi account
in addit to the document requir for open a person account the open
document for a corpor account will includ a copi of the corpor resolut
author the open of a bank account and possibl the compani articl of
incorpor these document should indic who the compani corpor offic ar
and it date of incorpor
for an unincorpor compani to open a bank account the bake institut might
requir the compani to provid a do busi as dba registr fictiti name
registr or busi registr certif gener the requir document
depend on the applic state law
