2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Deposit Tickets


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Deposit Tickets 
The deposit ticket is the principal source document for crediting the customer’s account. 
Deposits are first recorded on the deposit ticket or slip that usually segregates currency, 
coins, and checks. The checks are listed separately. In many localities the depositor writes 
the ABA number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket. Either of 
these might help to identify the source of the check. In other localities the bank writes the 
ABA number on the deposit ticket, and in some banks no identifying data is entered on the 
deposit ticket. Regardless of the detail contained on a deposit ticket, bank record-keeping 
systems allow deposits to be identified and traced to their sources.  
 
In working with deposit tickets, the fraud examiner must remember that sometimes the 
depositor splits the deposit, meaning only part of the check is actually deposited. In these 
instances, the customer either receives cash or requests that part of the proceeds be applied 
to a note or interest due to the bank. In some instances, it might be important to determine 
the total amount of cash and checks presented for deposit before deductions. When this is 
the case, the fraud examiner should inquire from the bank how split deposits are handled. 
 
Deposit items can be broken down into two types: on-us items and clearinghouse items. 
 
ON-US ITEMS 
An on-us item  is a check or draft that is presented for payment where the depository bank is 
also the payor bank. For example, a check written by a customer of one bank is deposited by 
the payee at another branch of the same bank. The bank should be able to trace the source 
of any on-us items. The source might be loan proceeds, certificates of deposit, wire transfers, 
bank checks, or checks from other deposits at that bank. If the deposit is the proceeds from 
a loan, obtain and analyze the loan file (examination of the loan file is discussed later in this 
chapter). If the deposit came from a wire transfer, trace the wire transfer to the originating 
bank to see where the funds for the wire transfer originated. This search could lead to other 
accounts, other witnesses, co-conspirators, or offshore transactions. 
 
Bank checks (such as cashier’s checks and money orders) could be an indication of smurfing 
operations. Smurfing  is the process by which a subject structures a deposit into several 
transactions, each less than $10,000, to avoid filing a currency transaction report as required 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.817 
under the Bank Secrecy Act. As the video portion of this course makes clear, smurfing is a 
very common technique for avoiding reporting requirements. Look for large numbers of 
cashier’s checks in even amounts deposited on a regular basis.  
 
CLEARINGHOUSE ITEMS 
Clearinghouse items  are those that must clear through other local banks and are therefore sent 
to a local clearinghouse for processing, and they include those items that are sent to out-of-
 town banks, such as Federal Reserve Banks. Because tracking down these items will involve 
obtaining records from third-party banks, the tracing process might be more time 
consuming and will probably require legal process. 
 
To determine whether an item is an on-us item or a clearinghouse item, first look to see 
whether the bank on which the check was drawn is the same as the bank in which it was 
deposited. If the names are not the same, check the endorsements on the back of the check. 
If the item has a different bank’s endorsement or  a Federal Reserve bank’s endorsement, it is 
a clearinghouse item. The endorsement should contain the name of the processing bank or 
its transit number. 
 



:


deposit ticket
the deposit ticket is the princip sourc document for credit the custom account
deposit ar first record on the deposit ticket or slip that usual segreg currenc
coin and check the check ar list separ in mani local the depositor write
the aba number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket either of
these might help to identifi the sourc of the check in other local the bank write the
aba number on the deposit ticket and in some bank no identifi data is enter on the
deposit ticket regardless of the detail contain on a deposit ticket bank recordkeep
system allow deposit to be identifi and trace to their sourc
in work with deposit ticket the fraud examin must rememb that sometim the
depositor split the deposit mean onli part of the check is actual deposit in these
instanc the custom either receiv cash or request that part of the proce be appli
to a note or interest due to the bank in some instanc it might be import to determin
the total amount of cash and check present for deposit befor deduct when thi is
the case the fraud examin should inquir from the bank how split deposit ar handl
deposit item can be broken down into two type onu item and clearinghous item
onu item
an onu item is a check or draft that is present for payment where the depositori bank is
also the payor bank for exampl a check written by a custom of on bank is deposit by
the paye at anoth branch of the same bank the bank should be abl to trace the sourc
of ani onu item the sourc might be loan proce certif of deposit wire transfer
bank check or check from other deposit at that bank if the deposit is the proce from
a loan obtain and analyz the loan file examin of the loan file is discuss later in thi
chapter if the deposit came from a wire transfer trace the wire transfer to the origin
bank to see where the fund for the wire transfer origin thi search could lead to other
account other wit coconspir or offshor transact
bank check such as cashier check and monei order could be an indic of smurf
oper smurf is the process by which a subject structur a deposit into sever
transact each less than 10000 to avoid file a currenc transact report as requir
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3817
under the bank secreci act as the video portion of thi cours make clear smurf is a
veri common techniqu for avoid report requir look for larg number of
cashier check in even amount deposit on a regular basi
clearinghous item
clearinghous item ar those that must clear through other local bank and ar therefor sent
to a local clearinghous for process and thei includ those item that ar sent to outof
town bank such as feder reserv bank becaus track down these item will involv
obtain record from thirdparti bank the trace process might be more time
consum and will probabl requir legal process
to determin whether an item is an onu item or a clearinghous item first look to see
whether the bank on which the check wa drawn is the same as the bank in which it wa
deposit if the name ar not the same check the endors on the back of the check
if the item ha a differ bank endors or a feder reserv bank endors it is
a clearinghous item the endors should contain the name of the process bank or
it transit number
