2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Other Exchange Instruments


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Other Exchange Instruments 
Exchange instruments are vehicles by which the bank transfers funds, and these instruments 
include cashier’s checks, bank drafts, traveler ’s checks, bank money orders, and certified 
checks. Bank exchange instruments are often purchased with currency; therefore, they may 
be good sources of information about a subject’s currency transactions. 
 
CASHIER’S CHECKS 
Cashier’s checks  are issued and certified by a bank with itself as the drawer. These items are 
called treasurer’s checks when issued by a trust company. They are frequently an excellent 
lead to other bank accounts, stock, real property, and other assets. Because cashier’s checks 
can be held indefinitely, subjects sometimes purchase cashier’s checks instead of keeping 
large amounts of currency on hand. In reconstructing a subject’s transactions with cashier’s 
checks, be sure that all checks are accounted for because subjects sometimes exchange 
previously purchased checks for new ones.  
 
Bank checks, such as cashier’s checks, can be extremely time consuming and expensive to 
locate unless you know the date and number of the check. However, if the subject has 
deposited a bank check into his account, or purchased a bank check using a check from his 
account, then copies of bank checks are much easier to obtain because the subject’s account 
records will reveal the date and number of the bank check. 
 
BANK DRAFTS 
Bank drafts are checks drawn by the issuing bank on its account with another bank. Often 
this other account is in the geographical area where the purchaser desires to make a 
payment. Bank drafts also can be used when a subject does not want to carry a large amount 
of cash. 
 
TRAVELER’S CHECKS 
Traveler’s checks are checks issued in predetermined amounts by the American Express 
Company and several large U.S. banks. Local banks purchase them from issuing companies 
of U.S. banks and then sell them to the public. Traveler’s checks require two signatures of 
the purchaser: one when purchased and the other when cashed. Traveler’s checks are traced 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
by their serial number. The issuing company usually keeps records of traveler’s checks sent 
to it by the selling bank. Traveler’s checks do not expire. 
 
The local bank that sold the checks might keep a copy of the sales order that lists the serial 
numbers. If the numbers are not available, the issuing bank might be able to supply the 
information if it is known when the checks were purchased. Canceled checks can be 
obtained from the American Express Company or from other issuing banks. A target can 
purchase large amounts of traveler’s checks from one bank and place them in another to 
avoid arousing suspicion by depositing cash. 
 
It is important to note, however, that traveler’s checks are declining in use. According to the 
Federal Reserve, usage of traveler’s checks has declined each year since their peak in the mid 
1990s.  
 
BANK MONEY ORDERS 
Bank money orders are similar to cashier’s checks but usually are for small amounts. Like 
cashier’s checks, money orders may be resorted to by subjects reluctant to use cash. 
 
CERTIFIED CHECKS 
Certified checks  are customer’s checks stamped with the paying bank’s guarantee that the 
maker’s signature is genuine and that there is enough money available in the holder’s account  
to cover the amount to be paid.  Certified checks are liabilities of the bank and, when paid, 
are kept by the bank. These checks are immediately charged against the customer’s account 
by debit memorandums. Some banks permit customers to retrieve the original checks by 
surrendering the debit memorandum.  
 



:


other exchang instrument
exchang instrument ar vehicl by which the bank transfer fund and these instrument
includ cashier check bank draft travel s check bank monei order and certifi
check bank exchang instrument ar often purchas with currenc therefor thei mai
be good sourc of inform about a subject currenc transact
cashier check
cashier check ar issu and certifi by a bank with itself as the drawer these item ar
call treasur check when issu by a trust compani thei ar frequent an excel
lead to other bank account stock real properti and other asset becaus cashier check
can be held indefinit subject sometim purchas cashier check instead of keep
larg amount of currenc on hand in reconstruct a subject transact with cashier
check be sure that all check ar account for becaus subject sometim exchang
previous purchas check for new on
bank check such as cashier check can be extrem time consum and expens to
locat unless you know the date and number of the check howev if the subject ha
deposit a bank check into hi account or purchas a bank check us a check from hi
account then copi of bank check ar much easier to obtain becaus the subject account
record will reveal the date and number of the bank check
bank draft
bank draft ar check drawn by the issu bank on it account with anoth bank often
thi other account is in the geograph area where the purchas desir to make a
payment bank draft also can be us when a subject doe not want to carri a larg amount
of cash
travel check
travel check ar check issu in predetermin amount by the american express
compani and sever larg us bank local bank purchas them from issu compani
of us bank and then sell them to the public travel check requir two signatur of
the purchas on when purchas and the other when cash travel check ar trace
trace illicit transact investig
3820 2011 fraud examin manual
by their serial number the issu compani usual keep record of travel check sent
to it by the sell bank travel check do not expir
the local bank that sold the check might keep a copi of the sale order that list the serial
number if the number ar not avail the issu bank might be abl to suppli the
inform if it is known when the check were purchas cancel check can be
obtain from the american express compani or from other issu bank a target can
purchas larg amount of travel check from on bank and place them in anoth to
avoid arous suspicion by deposit cash
it is import to note howev that travel check ar declin in us accord to the
feder reserv usag of travel check ha declin each year sinc their peak in the mid
1990
bank monei order
bank monei order ar similar to cashier check but usual ar for small amount like
cashier check monei order mai be resort to by subject reluct to us cash
certifi check
certifi check ar custom check stamp with the pai bank guarante that the
maker signatur is genuin and that there is enough monei avail in the holder account
to cover the amount to be paid certifi check ar liabil of the bank and when paid
ar kept by the bank these check ar immedi charg against the custom account
by debit memorandum some bank permit custom to retriev the origin check by
surrend the debit memorandum
