2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Loan Records


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Loan Records 
Loan records can provide important information regarding a subject. With loan records, the 
collateral that secures them, and the results of (bank) credit investigations, a bank has a 
wealth of information. When a bank makes a commercial loan to an individual, it requires 
detailed statements of assets and liabilities from the borrower. The loan file also might 
include the results of credit inquiries regarding paying habits, loan amounts, and present 
unpaid balances. A bank credit department generally maintains the following basic records: 
• The credit or loan file: This file includes the loan application, financial statement, and 
general economic history of the customer. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.821 
• The liability ledger : This contains the customer’s past and present liability to the bank. 
These sheets also contain information such as the loan date, note number, amount of the 
loan, interest rate, due date, and payments. 
• The collateral file: A complete description of the items pledged as security for loans. 
Records of such collateral can provide valuable information about a subject’s assets. 
 
Indications of unusual loans include loans in odd amounts or loans that were not deposited 
into the subject’s bank account. Loans that show unusual repayments also should be traced. 
Lump-sum payments and odd-amount payments are unusual. Accelerated payments or large 
pay-downs on the balance might indicate sudden wealth. 
 
Loan records also might reveal collusion between  the bank and the subject. For instance, if 
the records show that a loan repayment is long overdue or the loan has an extended rollover, 
collusion might exist. Also, loans made in contravention to the bank’s normal loan or a loan 
that appears to be in excess of the individual’s ability to repay suggests a “special 
relationship” between the bank and the subject. 
 
Loan proceeds might be deposited into hidden accounts, or hidden accounts might be used 
for loan payments. Loans might be secured by hidden assets or cosigned by previously 
unknown cohorts. Alternatively, the subject might have taken out the loan for someone else. 
Tracing the ultimate disposition of the proceeds will uncover those leads. 
 
Tracing the disposition of loan proceeds is similar to tracing deposit transactions. The 
proceeds could have been deposited within the bank into the subject’s account or someone 
else’s account, or they might be used to purchase a certificate of deposit. The funds might 
have been sent to the wire transfer department for transmittal to another bank. More 
commonly, the proceeds will be given to the customer in the form of a bank check. The 
bank should be able to trace the check to determine where it was deposited or cashed. The 
loan proceeds might have been used to finance an asset, the down payment for which came 
from illegal funds. Tracing the source of loan payments will provide some leads; for instance, 
the payments might be made from a previously unknown account. Payments made by a 
third-party might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme. 
 
The loan application should contain a financial statement, or its equivalent, on which the 
subject may identify other accounts and assets. The file might also contain tax returns, credit 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.822   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency reports, and notes of interviews by the loan officer. The security for the loan, if any, 
might be a hidden asset. 
 
MORTGAGE LOAN FILES 
Mortgage loan files often contain the most detailed financial statements submitted by the 
subject. The loan file should identify the title company that handled the closing, the 
homeowner’s insurance carrier, the closing attorney, and perhaps the real estate broker. The 
title company files often contain copies of the cashier’s checks used for the down payment, 
which can identify new accounts. 
 
The homeowner’s insurance policy might contain a rider that lists the homeowner’s valuable 
assets, such as jewelry or furs, perhaps with appraisals and purchase receipts. The closing 
attorney will have many of the same materials found in the title company files. The real 
estate broker might keep copies of personal checks used for deposits and provide 
information about other real estate transactions by the subjects. Don’t forget to look for 
accelerated or lump sum payments on the mortgage balance. 
 
CHECK CREDIT LOANS 
Check credit is another loan service that more and more banks are offering. Under a check 
credit plan, the bank agrees to extend credit to a customer up to a maximum amount. If the 
amount of the check is not in the customer’s a ccount, the resulting overdraft is set up as a 
loan. The bank then bills the customer for the loan. Another plan is a specialized checking 
account that is used only up to a predetermined amount under a loan agreement; the 
outstanding balance is treated as an installment loan by the bank. Copies of loan agreements 
and statements under both plans can be obtained from the bank files. 
 



:


loan record
loan record can provid import inform regard a subject with loan record the
collater that secur them and the result of bank credit investig a bank ha a
wealth of inform when a bank make a commerci loan to an individu it requir
detail statement of asset and liabil from the borrow the loan file also might
includ the result of credit inquiri regard pai habit loan amount and present
unpaid balanc a bank credit depart gener maintain the follow basic record
the credit or loan file thi file includ the loan applic financi statement and
gener econom histori of the custom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3821
the liabil ledger thi contain the custom past and present liabil to the bank
these sheet also contain inform such as the loan date note number amount of the
loan interest rate due date and payment
the collater file a complet descript of the item pledg as secur for loan
record of such collater can provid valuabl inform about a subject asset
indic of unusu loan includ loan in odd amount or loan that were not deposit
into the subject bank account loan that show unusu repay also should be trace
lumpsum payment and oddamount payment ar unusu acceler payment or larg
paydown on the balanc might indic sudden wealth
loan record also might reveal collus between the bank and the subject for instanc if
the record show that a loan repay is long overdu or the loan ha an extend rollov
collus might exist also loan made in contravent to the bank normal loan or a loan
that appear to be in excess of the individu abil to repai suggest a special
relationship between the bank and the subject
loan proce might be deposit into hidden account or hidden account might be us
for loan payment loan might be secur by hidden asset or cosign by previous
unknown cohort altern the subject might have taken out the loan for someon els
trace the ultim disposit of the proce will uncov those lead
trace the disposit of loan proce is similar to trace deposit transact the
proce could have been deposit within the bank into the subject account or someon
els account or thei might be us to purchas a certif of deposit the fund might
have been sent to the wire transfer depart for transmitt to anoth bank more
commonli the proce will be given to the custom in the form of a bank check the
bank should be abl to trace the check to determin where it wa deposit or cash the
loan proce might have been us to financ an asset the down payment for which came
from illeg fund trace the sourc of loan payment will provid some lead for instanc
the payment might be made from a previous unknown account payment made by a
thirdparti might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme
the loan applic should contain a financi statement or it equival on which the
subject mai identifi other account and asset the file might also contain tax return credit
trace illicit transact investig
3822 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc report and note of interview by the loan offic the secur for the loan if ani
might be a hidden asset
mortgag loan file
mortgag loan file often contain the most detail financi statement submit by the
subject the loan file should identifi the titl compani that handl the close the
homeown insur carrier the close attornei and perhap the real estat broker the
titl compani file often contain copi of the cashier check us for the down payment
which can identifi new account
the homeown insur polici might contain a rider that list the homeown valuabl
asset such as jewelri or fur perhap with apprais and purchas receipt the close
attornei will have mani of the same materi found in the titl compani file the real
estat broker might keep copi of person check us for deposit and provid
inform about other real estat transact by the subject dont forget to look for
acceler or lump sum payment on the mortgag balanc
check credit loan
check credit is anoth loan servic that more and more bank ar offer under a check
credit plan the bank agre to extend credit to a custom up to a maximum amount if the
amount of the check is not in the custom a ccount the result overdraft is set up as a
loan the bank then bill the custom for the loan anoth plan is a special check
account that is us onli up to a predetermin amount under a loan agreement the
outstand balanc is treat as an instal loan by the bank copi of loan agreement
and statement under both plan can be obtain from the bank file
