2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Safe-Deposit Box Records


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Safe-deposit boxes are private vault spaces rented by banks to customers. Because state laws 
differ, the nature of the relationship varies between a bank and the safe-deposit box holders. 
Banks keep no record of safe-deposit box contents and rarely know what the boxes contain. 
The rental contract records identify the renters, the person or people who have access to the 
boxes, their signatures, and the dates of the original agreements and later renewals. They also 
might contain other identifying information, including the name of the initiating bank 
officer. The officer’s name could be significant if the subject (who might have used an alias 
in renting the box) must be identified. 
 
Records showing access to the boxes vary from bank to bank. But generally, they contain the 
signatures of the people entering the boxes and usually the dates and times of entry. The 
entry records are filed in box-number order. The frequency of entry and the times and dates 
of entries might be significant and might correspond to the times and dates of deposits or 
withdrawals from other accounts or to the purchases and sales of securities, property, and in 
other situations. 
 
Because the bank records will not show the contents of the box, the fraud examiner can 
request permission to inventory the box with the target present, carefully noting and 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
describing the exact contents (for example, legal description on deeds, numbers of insurance 
policies, etc.). 
 



:


safedeposit box record
safedeposit box ar privat vault space rent by bank to custom becaus state law
differ the natur of the relationship vari between a bank and the safedeposit box holder
bank keep no record of safedeposit box content and rare know what the box contain
the rental contract record identifi the renter the person or peopl who have access to the
box their signatur and the date of the origin agreement and later renew thei also
might contain other identifi inform includ the name of the initi bank
offic the offic name could be signific if the subject who might have us an alia
in rent the box must be identifi
record show access to the box vari from bank to bank but gener thei contain the
signatur of the peopl enter the box and usual the date and time of entri the
entri record ar file in boxnumb order the frequenc of entri and the time and date
of entri might be signific and might correspond to the time and date of deposit or
withdraw from other account or to the purchas and sale of secur properti and in
other situat
becaus the bank record will not show the content of the box the fraud examin can
request permiss to inventori the box with the target present carefulli note and
trace illicit transact investig
3824 2011 fraud examin manual
describ the exact content for exampl legal descript on deed number of insur
polici etc
