2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions 
In contrast to the direct approach method of proving income, which relies on specific 
transactions, the indirect approach relies on circumstantial proof of income using such as the 
net worth analysis. 
 
Almost all individuals and business entities determine income by the specific-items or 
specific - transactions method. Most entities engaged in legitimate pursuits maintain books 
and records in which they record transactions as they occur, and their income computations 
are based upon the total transactions during a given period. In fraud examinations, income 
can usually be established more readily by the direct approach; for this reason, it should be 
used whenever possible. 
 
In many fraud schemes, however, a subject’s books and records are not made available to 
the examiner. Therefore, an indirect approach must be taken using one of the following 
methods: the net worth analysis: asset method, the expenditures (source and application of 
funds) method, or the bank deposit analysis method. Although these methods are 
circumstantial proof, courts have approved their use in civil and criminal cases on the theory 
that proof of a subject’s unexplained funds or property might establish a prima facie 
understatement of income.  
 
Elements of Financial Examination Techniques 
To examine company books and records for fraud, the fraud examiner must know and 
understand the environment in which the entity operates, the entity’s accounting system 
(including the types of schemes relevant to the entity and the controls that are designed to 
prevent fraud), basic concealment methods, and various detection techniques. 
 
The Environment 
It is critical to understand the business (or government) environment where the entity 
operates. To understand the environment, you must have a firm grasp of the nature of the 
business, the competition, the market share, the financing structure, the vendors (suppliers), 
major customers, the methods of receipts (i.e., cash or on account) and disbursements, the 
procurement methods (i.e., whether goods and services are obtained through a bidding 
process or not), the general economic climate, and the personnel pool available to the entity. 
It is through the understanding of the entity as an operating enterprise that you can assess 
the risks associated with the particular operations. The risks and peculiarities of the entity 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
will help shape the nature of potential fraud schemes that can be perpetrated by the entity’s 
employees. 
 
The Accounting System 
Understanding the basic accounting system and its integration with the operations of the 
business is important. The basic accounting system, including the system of internal 
controls, is the key element in providing evidence of past, present, and future internal fraud. 
Internal fraud that is on-book will appear within the entity’s financial records. The audit trail 
might be obscure, but it will exist nonetheless. If the internal fraud is off-book, then other 
evidence might, with diligent fraud examination techniques, be uncovered. 
 
All internal fraud has an impact on the bottom line. However, fraud in small amounts will be 
harder to detect because of its immaterial amount relative to the financial statements as a 
whole. If an internal fraud scheme is large enough, it will have an effect on the entity’s 
financial statements.  
 
Various Detection Techniques 
Though there are many fraud detection methods, whatever method is employed will usually 
require the examination of source documents. Many times, these source documents provide 
the evidence necessary to prove fraud in a court of law. Additionally, in many cases, the 
source documents will help establish the intent of the fraud offenders. 
 
Individual or groups of documents can be examined in several ways to detect possible fraud. 
Because most internal fraud is continuous in nature, groups of documents can be analyzed 
for exceptions and trends. Many times a large population must be sampled to determine, 
with statistical validity, if documents have been altered. Statistical sampling quantifies the risk 
of arriving at an incorrect conclusion; it is generally necessary with large populations. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fraud examiners want to examine sales invoices for proper approvals in a company with $2 
billion in annual sales. The average sales inv oice is $15,000. By selecting a valid statistical 
sample of sales, the examiners can project the effectiveness of internal controls regarding the 
approval of the sales invoices, assuming proper interpretation of test results. If deficiencies exist 
in the controls, then those results should become apparent in the test results. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.831 
Statistical Sampling 
If an anomaly is found in the financial statements and transactions and further investigation 
is desired, it might be appropriate to pull a statistical sample. By using statistical sampling, 
the examiner can look at fewer transactions rather than the entire population.  
 
There are two basic risks associated with statistical sampling: sampling risk and nonsampling 
risk. Sampling risk  is the probability that the sample is not representative of the population; 
nonsampling risk  is the possibility of making the wrong decision. Nonsampling risk cannot be 
quantified. However, fraud examiners can control it through adequate planning and 
supervision of audit engagements. 
 
When using statistical sampling, you must draw a random sample. That is, each member of 
the population must have an equal chance of being selected. There are two primary types of 
statistical sampling: attribute and discovery. 
 
SAMPLING FOR ATTRIBUTES 
Sampling for attributes is used by auditors or fraud examiners looking for a deviation 
occurrence rate (deviations, errors, and exceptions  are synonyms). When performing this type of 
sampling, you are looking for the presence or absence of a defined condition. 
 
EXAMPLE 
For each sales invoice in the sample, is there a corresponding shipping order? The answer to the 
question can only be “yes” or “no.” If the control condition is that each sales invoice is not 
recorded until there has been a shipping order attached, then any “no” response for a booked 
sale would represent an error. 
 
DISCOVERY SAMPLING 
This is the best type of sampling for auditing for fraud because it is sampling until one 
occurrence is found. Discovery sampling deals with the probability of discovering at least 
one error in a given sample size if the population error is a certain percentage. This type of 
sampling is directed toward a specific objective, such as: 
 
EXAMPLE 
“If I believe some kind of error or irregularity might exist in the records, what sample size will I have to 
audit to have assurance of finding at least one example?” 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Discovery sampling is best used when looking for things such as forged checks or 
intercompany sales that have been improperly classified as sales to outsiders. 
 
RANDOM SAMPLES 
When using the discovery-sampling technique, the selection of samples should be done 
randomly. For a sample to be random, every member of the population must have an equal 
opportunity of being selected.  
 
Items in the population can be numbered and selected by reference to a random number 
table. Or if the items in the population already have numbers (such as check numbers or 
invoice numbers) then a random sample can be selected by using a random number 
generator from a computer software program. To select a random sample, (1) identify a 
number for every item in the population, (2) correspond the random numbers with each 
item in the population, (3) select the route through the random number table, and (4) select 
the sample.  
 
Additionally, make sure that you consistently follow the pattern picked for corresponding 
random numbers to items in the population and that you document the random number 
selection process in the event the sample needs rechecking or additional sample items need 
to be selected for testing. If the sample is selected randomly and the sample is large enough, 
then the sample should represent the population.  
 
DOCUMENTS 
Fraud will often be concealed in questionable documents. Missing or altered documents are 
some of the principal indicators of fraud, and such occurrences should be thoroughly 
investigated. Certain documents are a natural part of the accounting system. However, when 
a pattern of these documents occurs, or an unusual quantity of these documents is noted, 
further examination might be warranted. 
 
The common-sense test should be applied to any document that appears to have 
questionable features under the circumstances, such as amounts too high or too low; odd 
names, times, and places; and identical names and addresses. Fraud can often involve 
questionable journal entries in the records, such as inappropriate charges to expense 
accounts or inventory. For example, large journal entries in the inventory accounts near the 
end of the year might point to a cover-up of inventory theft. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.833 
An overabundant number of voids might mean that a fraudster is voiding legitimate sales 
and pocketing the proceeds. Excessive credit memos might also signal the reversal of 
legitimate sales and the diversion of cash. Too many late charges might indicate that an 
account receivable is delinquent because it is a fictitious account and, therefore, will never be 
paid. Stale items on any reconciliation bear watching. For example, stale outstanding checks 
may indicate attempted concealment of embezzlement losses or diverted cash. Original 
documents, such as invoices, should be used to authorize transactions because photocopied 
or duplicate documents can be subject to manipulation and alteration. 
 
Net-Worth Methods 
Examining for fraud not only involves the examination of the entity’s books and records, it 
might also entail the estimation of the fraud suspect’s change in net worth or expenditures. 
If fraud is suspected, then using either of the net-worth methods might help in establishing 
evidence of a fraud. 
 
The net-worth method (or comparative net-worth analysis) is used to prove illicit income 
circumstantially, by showing that a person’s assets or expenditures for a given period exceed 
that which can be accounted for from known or admitted sources of income. The net-worth 
method is a reliable method for estimating a person’s ill-gotten gains. The method is used 
extensively by the Internal Revenue Service, especially in drug and money laundering cases. 
 
The net-worth method relies on the familiar balance sheet format readily recognizable in the 
business world and presents a complete financial picture of a subject. It is based on the 
theory that increases or decreases in a person’s net worth during a period, adjusted for living 
expenses, allow a determination of income. 
 
Net worth  can be defined as the difference between assets and liabilities at a particular point in 
time. By comparing the subject’s net worth at the beginning and end of a period, usually a 
calendar year, the economic crime investigator can determine the increase or decrease in net 
worth. Adjustments are then made for living expenses to arrive at income. Income includes 
receipts derived from all sources. Thus, by subtracting funds from known sources (salary, 
wages, interest, or dividends, for example), funds from unknown or illegal sources can  
be calculated. 
 
The courts approved using the net-worth method in the leading Supreme Court case of 
Holland v. United States, 348 U.S. 121 (1954), along with the three companion cases, Smith v. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
United States, 348 U.S. 147 (1954); Friedberg v. United States, 348 142 (1954); and United States v. 
Calderon, 348 U.S. 160 (1954). These cases outlined broad principles to govern the trial and 
review of cases based on the net-worth method of proving income. 
 
The net-worth method is often used when several of the subject’s assets or liabilities have 
changed during the period under examination and when the target’s financial records are not 
available. 
 
An individual’s assets, liabilities, and living expenses can be determined from a variety of 
sources, such as: 
• The subject 
• Informants or sources 
• Real estate records 
• Judgment and lien records 
• Bankruptcy records 
• State motor vehicle records 
• Loan applications 
• Financial statements 
• Accountant’s work papers 
• Lawsuits and depositions 
• Surveillance 
• Credit card applications or statements 
• Tax returns 
• Insurance records 
• Child support and divorce records 
• Employment applications and salary checks 
• Companions or associates 
• Canceled checks and deposited items 
 
The question might arise regarding why items that do not change should be included in the 
net-worth statement, particularly since they have no bearing on the final result. The answer is 
that a net-worth statement gives a complete financial picture of the subject and therefore 
should be as complete as possible so that the target will not be able to contest it on the 
grounds that items were omitted. Additionally, the net-worth statement can be the 
foundation for examination of the subject, and a complete statement will prove extremely 
valuable at that time. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.835 
There are two basic methods of net-worth computation: The asset method and the expenditures  
or sources and applications of funds method. They are discussed in detail herein. 
 
The asset method should be used when the subject has invested illegal funds to accumulate 
wealth and acquire assets, causing net worth (value of assets over liabilities) to increase from 
year to year. The expenditures method  is best used when the subject spends illicit income on 
consumables (such as travel and entertainment) that would not cause an increase in  
net worth. 
 
Each method has similar steps. Begin both methods by assembling the financial and 
behavioral profile. Identify all major assets and liabilities, sources of income, and major 
expenses during the relevant period. The increase, if any, in the subject’s net worth or the 
level of expenditures is then compared to the legitimate funds available. Unaccounted funds 
might be inferred to come from illicit or hidden sources. 
 
THE FINANCIAL PROFILE 
The first step is to prepare the financial profile  of the suspect. The financial profile is 
essentially a financial statement with certain modifications and additions that shows what the 
defendant owns, owes, earns, and spends at any given point or over a period of time. The 
profile might yield direct evidence of illegal income or hidden assets, or circumstantial 
evidence thereof, by showing that the suspect’s expenditures exceeded known sources of 
income. 
 
The financial profile will identify most illicit funds that are deposited to accounts or 
expended in significant amounts. It will not catch relatively small currency transactions, 
particularly if they were for concealed activities, consumables, or for unusual one-time 
expenses such as medical bills. 
 
Determine the target’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses from the following sources: 
• Interviews 
• The target 
• Associates 
• Documents from financial sources (e.g., accountant, banker) 
• Bank account records 
• Mortgage and loan files 
• Credit card records 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tax returns 
• Public records 
• Business filings 
• Real estate filings 
• Court records 
 
To prepare the financial profile, follow the following six steps.  
 
STEP 1 
Identify all significant assets held by the suspect. An asset is cash (on hand) or anything else 
of value that can be converted into cash.  
 
Cash on hand is coin and currency (bills, coins, Federal Reserve notes) in the subject’s 
possession (on the subject’s person, in the subject ’s residence or other place in a nominee’s 
hands, or in a safe-deposit box). It does not include money in any account with a financial 
institution. When using the net-worth method, the item that may be the most difficult to 
verify is the amount of cash on hand, which is usually claimed by defendants to be sufficient 
to account for all or part of the unknown sources of income. To establish a firm starting net 
worth, it must be shown that the target had no large cash sums for which he was not given 
credit. This is usually done by offering evidence that negates the existence of a cash hoard. 
Such evidence might include: 
• Written or oral admissions of the subject concerning net worth (a signed net-worth 
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand) 
• Low earnings in pre-examination years, as shown by records of former employers 
and/or tax returns filed by subject 
• Net worth, as established by books and records of the subject 
• Financial statement presented for credit or other purposes at a time before or during the 
period under examination (banks, loan companies, and bonding companies are some of 
the better sources from which to obtain this type of document) 
• Bankruptcy before examination periods 
• Prior indebtedness, compromise of overdue debts, and avoidance of bankruptcy 
• Installment buying 
• History of low earnings and expenditures, and checks returned for insufficient funds (a 
financial history covering members of the subject’s family also might be helpful) 
• Loss of furniture and business because of financial reasons 
• Receipt of some type of public assistance 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.837 
STEP 2 
Identify all significant liabilities. A liability is an obligation (debt) arising from an oral or 
written promise to pay.  
 
STEP 3 
Identify all income sources during the relevant time period. Income includes money or other 
things of value received in exchange for services or goods. Income is never included as an 
asset. Loan proceeds are not included as income but are treated as an asset that is offset by a 
corresponding liability. 
 
STEP 4 
Identify all significant expenses incurred during the relevant period. An expense is any 
payment for consumables, for personal or business reasons, over the relevant time period. 
Expenses are not included as liabilities. 
 
STEP 5 
Analyze the information you have collected by using the following charts. 
 
The Financial Profile 
 
TYPICAL ASSETS For each significant asset determine : 
 
Residence 
Real estate 
Bank accounts 
Stocks and 
bonds 
Automobiles 
Insurance 
Cash on hand 
 
Jewelry 
Clothing 
Collectibles 
Pensions 
Home 
furnishings 
Boats 
 
—When was it acquired and from whom? 
—How much did it cost?  
—How was it paid for (currency, check, cashier’s 
check)? 
—What source of funds was used to acquire it? 
—What documentation exists for the purchase and 
where is it? 
 
 
 
TYPICAL LIABILITIES For each significant liability determine: 
 
Mortgage(s) 
Other loans 
Lines of credit 
Credit cards  
Installment purchases 
Accounts payable 
 
—What was the original amount of the liability? 
—What is the present balance due? 
—When was the liability incurred? 
—What was the purpose for the loan or debt? 
—How were the proceeds used and where were they 
deposited? 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Taxes and other bills 
Alimony and child support 
— What security (collateral), if any, was given for the 
debt? 
— What documentation exists for the transaction and 
where is it? 
— Was the debt written off as a bad loan for tax 
purposes? 
— Who was the creditor or lender? 
 
 
TYPICAL SOURCES OF FUNDS 
 
For each source of funds determine: 
 
Salary 
Gifts 
Rental income 
Dividends 
Interest 
Sale of assets 
 
Insurance 
proceeds 
Commissions 
and fees 
Awards 
Inheritances 
Disability 
payments 
 
— What was the total amount during a given period? 
— What was the source? 
— How was it paid for (currency, check, other means)? 
— When were the funds received? 
— Where was it deposited? 
— How was it spent? 
— What documentation exists (e.g., W-2 or 1099 
forms) and where is it? 
 
TYPICAL EXPENDITURES 
For each major expenditure item determine : 
 
Rent and 
mortgage 
Health costs 
Interest on 
loans 
Credit cards 
Car payments 
Travel 
 
Clothing 
Utilities 
Food 
Insurance  
 
 
— What was the total amount spent? 
— How was it paid for? 
— Where were the funds obtai ned to pay the expense? 
— What documentation exists and where is it? 
— When was the payment made? 
 
THE BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The financial profile might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless certain activities 
are identified, which is done through preparing the behavioral profile. The behavioral profile 
might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such as large debts, as well as 
additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent significant amounts of 
cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from his disclosed bank accounts, or no 
admitted sources of cash income, he must have  other undisclosed sources of income. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.839 
Using the financial/behavioral profile as a guide, request an interview with the suspect. Pin 
down the suspect’s income, assets, and accounts. Otherwise, the subject might invent 
excuses or prepare false testimony or documentation to account for the unexplained income. 
 
Net-Worth Analysis 
Any recipient of funds, whether honest or suspect, has only four ways of disposing of 
income: save it, buy assets, pay off debts, or spend it. 
 
Net-worth analysis begins with the completion of a suspect’s financial profile. Through 
identification of the suspect’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, a net-worth statement 
can be determined. Once a net-worth statement is completed through the identification of a 
suspect’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, changes in the suspect’s net worth can be 
compared to his known income, and differences can be inferred to be from unknown 
sources. 
 
COMPARATIVE NET WORTH: ASSET METHOD  
Again, the asset method is advisable when it is suspected that the subject has purchased 
assets or otherwise increased his net worth. It can be applied for any number of years, but, 
ideally, it is best to start with the year before the suspected fraudulent activity began. The 
formula is: 
 
 Assets 
– Liabilities 
= Net worth 
– Prior year’s net worth 
= Net worth increase 
+ Living expenses 
= Income (or expenditures) 
– Funds from known sources 
= Funds from unknown sources 
 
In computing the comparative net worth, these issues should be considered: 
• All assets should be valued at cost, not fair market value. Subsequent appreciation or 
depreciation of assets is ignored. 
• The amount of funds available to the subject from legitimate sources should be 
estimated or computed generously. The amount of the subject’s expenditures, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
particularly hard-to-document living costs, such as food and entertainment, should be 
estimated conservatively to give the subject the benefit of any doubt. In attempting to 
estimate personal living expenses, you should consult the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
This agency publishes an annual table that details personal living expenses such as 
utilities, food, and gas. 
• Always attempt to interview the subject to identify all alleged sources of funds and to 
negate defenses that he might raise later. 
 
To compute the comparative net worth using the asset method, perform the following steps: 
• Establish the starting point, generally the year before the target’s illegal activities begin. 
This will be referred to as “year one” in the following computations. 
• Compute the target’s net worth at the end of year one. Identify all assets held by the 
subject, valued at cost, including assets acquired earlier, and the amount of current 
liabilities. 
 
The difference between the value of the assets and the liabilities is the target’s net worth at 
year one, or “opening net worth.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Year One 
Assets at Cost               Liabilities 
Residence $100,000  Mort gage balance $ 90,000 
Stocks and bonds 30,000  Automobile loan  
Automobile 20,000  balance 10,000 
 TOTAL $150,000  TOTAL $100,000 
 
Assets $150,000
 Liabilities -100,000
 Net Worth $50,000
  
Compute the target’s net worth for year two, using the same method. 
 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.841 
EXAMPLE 
Year Two 
                     Assets at Cost                                          Liabilities 
Residence $100,000  Mortgage balance $50,000 
Stocks and bonds 30,000    
Automobile 20,000  Automobile loan  
CD 50,000  balance  0  
 TOTAL $200,000  TOTAL $50,000  
 
Assets $200,000
 Liabilities -50,000
 Net Worth $150,000
  
Note that in the example the target’s net wo rth increased by $100,000 during year two. 
To determine the source of such an increase, determine the target’s known income, 
during year two, and subtract known expenses for year two. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Year Two 
               Income                            Expenses 
Salary $30,000  Mortgage interest 
payments 
 
$20,000 
Commissions 20,000  Living expenses 10,000  
 TOTAL $50,000  TOTAL $30,000 
   
The difference between the target’s income and expenses equals the increase (or decrease) in 
net worth from year one to year two, which can be attributed to known sources. Here it is 
$20,000. Subtract the increase in net worth fr om known sources from the total increase in 
net worth to determine the amount from unknown sources. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 Total increase in net worth $100,000 
 Increase attributed to known sources <20,000>  
 Dollars from unknown sources $80,000 
 
Repeat the above steps for subsequent years as necessary.  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXPENDITURES METHOD 
The expenditures method (also known as the sources and application of funds method) 
compares the suspect’s known expenditures and known sources of funds during a given 
period of time. Any excess expenditures must be the result of income from unknown 
sources. It is closely related to the net-worth analysis, accounting variations of the same 
principle. 
 
The table below illustrates the formula used to compute net worth using the expenditures 
method. The steps are discussed in greater detail below  
 
Expenditures  (Application of Funds)  
– Known source of funds  
= Funds from unknown sources  
 
To compute the subject’s net worth using the expenditures method, follow three steps. First, 
establish the subject’s known expenditures for the relevant year. Expenditures include the 
use or application of funds for any purpose, including deposits to bank accounts, purchase 
of major assets, travel and entertainment expenses, and payment of loan and credit card 
debts. Second, identify all sources of funds available to the subject, including loans and gifts, 
as well as cash on hand from previous years. Third, compute the difference between the 
amount of the suspect’s expenditures and his known income to determine the amount 
attributed to unknown sources. 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.843 
EXAMPLE 
Subject   Year One  Year Two  
Application of funds:  
 Increase in bank balance  $2,000 $10,000 
 Down payment on residence    ——  10,000  
 Purchase of automobile  10,000  ——— 
 Mortgage payments  8,000  20,000 
 Credit card payments  5,000  10,000 
 Other expenses  15,000  30,000 
 TOTAL  $40,000 $ 80,000 
Less: known sources of funds  
   Cash on hand 1,000  
   Salary 30,000 38,000 
   Interest earned on savings  
   Account 1,000 2,000 
   Loan proceeds 8,000  
 TOTAL $40,000 $ 40,000 
Funds from unk nown or illegal sources   0 $40,000 
 
The following example demonstrates how a net-worth analysis assisted prosecutors in their 
amended complaint against a fraud suspect. 
 
EXAMPLE 
R. Peery, age 40, the executive director of a five-state commission planning a low-level 
radioactive waste dump was charged with two ne w charges of felony theft. Peery was also 
charged with one federal count of wire fraud. 
 
Peery was accused of wiring $115,000 to a personal account in Georgia, and prosecutors 
said they suspected him of taking $600,000. He was also charged with  two counts of using 
commission funds in Nebraska to buy cars, a 1990 BMW valued  at $67,000 and a 
1991 BMW valued at $92,000. 
 
Peery was paid $52,000 annually. He lived in a house valued at $305,000 and at the 
time of his arrest had six luxury cars, including Jaguars, Mercedes-Benzes, and BMWs.  
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bank Deposit Analysis Method 
The bank deposit analysis method is another method to prove unknown sources of funds by 
indirect or circumstantial evidence. Like the other indirect methods of proof, the bank 
deposits method computes income by showing what happened to a subject’s funds. It is 
based on the theory that if a subject receives money, he can only do two things with it: he 
can deposit it or he can spend it.  
 
This method is applied when assets and liabilities are fairly constant from year to year and 
indications of extravagant expenditures are non-existent, but through investigation, the 
suspect’s known sources of income are being deposited into financial institutions. 
 
Under this method, income is proved through analyzing bank deposits, canceled checks, and 
the subject’s currency transactions. Adjustments for non-income items are made to arrive at 
income. A basic formula for the bank deposits method is: 
 
Total Deposits to All Accounts  
– Transfer and redeposits 
= Net deposits to all accounts 
+ Cash expenditures 
= Total receipts from all sources 
– Funds from known sources 
= Funds from unknown or illegal sources 
 
The bank deposits method is recommended as a primary method of proof when most of the 
subject’s income is deposited and the subject’s books and records are unavailable, withheld, 
incomplete, or maintained on a cash basis. Use of the bank deposits method is not limited to 
these circumstances, however. Even though the target’s books and records might appear to 
be complete and accurate, the method can still be used and there is no requirement to 
disprove the accuracy of the books and records. 
 
The basic sources of information for this analysis include  interviews, analyses of the books 
and records, and analyses of the bank accounts. A thorough interview will determine the 
subject’s expenditures by cash and checks, identi fy all bank accounts, and determine all loans 
and other receipts. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.845 
Total Deposits 
Total deposits consist not only of amounts deposited to all bank accounts maintained or 
controlled by the target but also deposits made to accounts in savings and loan companies, 
investment trusts, brokerage houses, and credit unions. Total deposits also include the 
accumulation (increase) of cash on hand. Because some subjects have bank accounts in 
fictitious names or under special titles, such as “Special Account No. 1,” “Trustee Account,” 
or “Trading Account,” the investigator should  look for this type of account during the 
investigation. If a subject lists checks on a deposit ticket and deducts an amount paid to him 
in cash (split deposit), only the net amount of the deposit should be used in computing  
total deposits. 
 
Additional items that must be included in deposits are property and notes that the subject 
received in payment for services. The accepted practice is to consider these items as 
depositories into which funds have been placed for future use. 
 
Net Deposits 
All transfers or exchanges between bank accounts as well as funds that are redeposited are 
non-income items and are subtracted from total deposits to yield net deposits. Failure to 
eliminate these items would result in an overstatement of income. 
 
Cash Expenditures 
Cash expenditures consist of the total outlay of funds less net bank disbursements. The total 
outlay of funds includes all payments made by cash or check. There is no need to determine 
which part was paid by cash and which part by check. Total outlays include but are not 
limited to: 
• Purchase of capital assets to investments (determined from settlement sheets, invoices, 
statements, and the like) 
• Loan repayments (determined from loan ledgers of banks or other creditors) 
• Living expenses (can be determined from the same sources presented in the net worth 
and expenditures sections) 
• Purchases, business expenses (less noncash items, such as depreciation), rental expenses, 
and the like 
 
  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Net bank disbursements can be determined by the following formula: 
 
Net Deposits to All Accounts  
+ Beginning balances 
= Net bank funds available 
– Ending balances 
= Net banking disbursements 
 
Funds from known sources include, but are not limited to salaries, business profits, 
insurance proceeds, gifts received, loans, and inheritances. Funds from known sources are 
subtracted from total receipts (or income) to arrive at funds from unknown or  
illegal sources. 
 
Rebutting Defenses to Indirect Methods of Proof 
Circumstantial evidence of excess income is often met with the defense that the extra funds 
came from cash accumulated earlier or from other legitimate sources, such as loans from 
relatives. To rebut these defenses, the fraud examiner must pin down the amount of cash on 
hand at the beginning of the relevant period (through, for example, amounts listed on 
financial statements or claimed in interviews) and do the following: 
• Obtain a financial history of the target and spouse, through interviews and other means, 
showing dates and places of employment, salary and bonuses, and any other related 
income. 
• Determine whether the spouse had any separate source of funds that were used to 
purchase jointly held assets or deposited in joint accounts. If so, the spouse must be 
included in the financial profile calculations. 
• Claims of a prior substantial cash hoard might be rebutted by showing that the target 
lived penuriously, borrowed money, made installment purchases, incurred large debts, 
was delinquent on accounts, had a poor credit rating, or filed for bankruptcy. Claims that 
cash came from family or other private loans might be rebutted by showing that the 
alleged lender was incapable of generating the amounts supposedly lent, the absence of 
any documentation reflecting the source of the alleged loan (no bank account 
withdrawals), and the absence of other sources of funds available to the lender. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.847 
The net-worth analysis—if records can be obtai ned—is a significant tool in documenting ill-
 gotten gains. With this as a basis, the following section covers the major schemes used to 
commit fraud against companies and governmental agencies. 
 
 



:


indirect method of trace financi transact
in contrast to the direct approach method of prove incom which reli on specif
transact the indirect approach reli on circumstanti proof of incom us such as the
net worth analysi
almost all individu and busi entiti determin incom by the specificitem or
specif transact method most entiti engag in legitim pursuit maintain book
and record in which thei record transact as thei occur and their incom comput
ar base upon the total transact dure a given period in fraud examin incom
can usual be establish more readili by the direct approach for thi reason it should be
us whenev possibl
in mani fraud scheme howev a subject book and record ar not made avail to
the examin therefor an indirect approach must be taken us on of the follow
method the net worth analysi asset method the expenditur sourc and applic of
fund method or the bank deposit analysi method although these method ar
circumstanti proof court have approv their us in civil and crimin case on the theori
that proof of a subject unexplain fund or properti might establish a prima faci
understat of incom
element of financi examin techniqu
to examin compani book and record for fraud the fraud examin must know and
understand the environ in which the entiti oper the entiti account system
includ the type of scheme relev to the entiti and the control that ar design to
prevent fraud basic conceal method and variou detect techniqu
the environ
it is critic to understand the busi or govern environ where the entiti
oper to understand the environ you must have a firm grasp of the natur of the
busi the competit the market share the financ structur the vendor supplier
major custom the method of receipt ie cash or on account and disburs the
procur method ie whether good and servic ar obtain through a bid
process or not the gener econom climat and the personnel pool avail to the entiti
it is through the understand of the entiti as an oper enterpris that you can assess
the risk associ with the particular oper the risk and peculiar of the entiti
trace illicit transact investig
3830 2011 fraud examin manual
will help shape the natur of potenti fraud scheme that can be perpetr by the entiti
employe
the account system
understand the basic account system and it integr with the oper of the
busi is import the basic account system includ the system of intern
control is the kei element in provid evid of past present and futur intern fraud
intern fraud that is onbook will appear within the entiti financi record the audit trail
might be obscur but it will exist nonetheless if the intern fraud is offbook then other
evid might with dilig fraud examin techniqu be uncov
all intern fraud ha an impact on the bottom line howev fraud in small amount will be
harder to detect becaus of it immateri amount rel to the financi statement as a
whole if an intern fraud scheme is larg enough it will have an effect on the entiti
financi statement
variou detect techniqu
though there ar mani fraud detect method whatev method is emploi will usual
requir the examin of sourc document mani time these sourc document provid
the evid necessari to prove fraud in a court of law addition in mani case the
sourc document will help establish the intent of the fraud offend
individu or group of document can be examin in sever wai to detect possibl fraud
becaus most intern fraud is continu in natur group of document can be analyz
for except and trend mani time a larg popul must be sampl to determin
with statist valid if document have been alter statist sampl quantifi the risk
of arriv at an incorrect conclus it is gener necessari with larg popul
exampl
fraud examin want to examin sale invoic for proper approv in a compani with 2
billion in annual sale the averag sale inv oic is 15000 by select a valid statist
sampl of sale the examin can project the effect of intern control regard the
approv of the sale invoic assum proper interpret of test result if defici exist
in the control then those result should becom appar in the test result
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3831
statist sampl
if an anomali is found in the financi statement and transact and further investig
is desir it might be appropri to pull a statist sampl by us statist sampl
the examin can look at fewer transact rather than the entir popul
there ar two basic risk associ with statist sampl sampl risk and nonsampl
risk sampl risk is the probabl that the sampl is not repres of the popul
nonsampl risk is the possibl of make the wrong decis nonsampl risk cannot be
quantifi howev fraud examin can control it through adequ plan and
supervis of audit engag
when us statist sampl you must draw a random sampl that is each member of
the popul must have an equal chanc of be select there ar two primari type of
statist sampl attribut and discoveri
sampl for attribut
sampl for attribut is us by auditor or fraud examin look for a deviat
occurr rate deviat error and except ar synonym when perform thi type of
sampl you ar look for the presenc or absenc of a defin condit
exampl
for each sale invoic in the sampl is there a correspond ship order the answer to the
question can onli be ye or no if the control condit is that each sale invoic is not
record until there ha been a ship order attach then ani no respons for a book
sale would repres an error
discoveri sampl
thi is the best type of sampl for audit for fraud becaus it is sampl until on
occurr is found discoveri sampl deal with the probabl of discov at least
on error in a given sampl size if the popul error is a certain percentag thi type of
sampl is direct toward a specif object such as
exampl
if i believ some kind of error or irregular might exist in the record what sampl size will i have to
audit to have assur of find at least on exampl
trace illicit transact investig
3832 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri sampl is best us when look for thing such as forg check or
intercompani sale that have been improperli classifi as sale to outsid
random sampl
when us the discoverysampl techniqu the select of sampl should be done
randomli for a sampl to be random everi member of the popul must have an equal
opportun of be select
item in the popul can be number and select by refer to a random number
tabl or if the item in the popul alreadi have number such as check number or
invoic number then a random sampl can be select by us a random number
gener from a comput softwar program to select a random sampl 1 identifi a
number for everi item in the popul 2 correspond the random number with each
item in the popul 3 select the rout through the random number tabl and 4 select
the sampl
addition make sure that you consist follow the pattern pick for correspond
random number to item in the popul and that you document the random number
select process in the event the sampl need recheck or addit sampl item need
to be select for test if the sampl is select randomli and the sampl is larg enough
then the sampl should repres the popul
document
fraud will often be conceal in question document miss or alter document ar
some of the princip indic of fraud and such occurr should be thoroughli
investig certain document ar a natur part of the account system howev when
a pattern of these document occur or an unusu quantiti of these document is note
further examin might be warrant
the commonsens test should be appli to ani document that appear to have
question featur under the circumst such as amount too high or too low odd
name time and place and ident name and address fraud can often involv
question journal entri in the record such as inappropri charg to expens
account or inventori for exampl larg journal entri in the inventori account near the
end of the year might point to a coverup of inventori theft
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3833
an overabund number of void might mean that a fraudster is void legitim sale
and pocket the proce excess credit memo might also signal the revers of
legitim sale and the divers of cash too mani late charg might indic that an
account receiv is delinqu becaus it is a fictiti account and therefor will never be
paid stale item on ani reconcili bear watch for exampl stale outstand check
mai indic attempt conceal of embezzl loss or divert cash origin
document such as invoic should be us to author transact becaus photocopi
or duplic document can be subject to manipul and alter
networth method
examin for fraud not onli involv the examin of the entiti book and record it
might also entail the estim of the fraud suspect chang in net worth or expenditur
if fraud is suspect then us either of the networth method might help in establish
evid of a fraud
the networth method or compar networth analysi is us to prove illicit incom
circumstanti by show that a person asset or expenditur for a given period exce
that which can be account for from known or admit sourc of incom the networth
method is a reliabl method for estim a person illgotten gain the method is us
extens by the intern revenu servic especi in drug and monei launder case
the networth method reli on the familiar balanc sheet format readili recogniz in the
busi world and present a complet financi pictur of a subject it is base on the
theori that increas or decreas in a person net worth dure a period adjust for live
expens allow a determin of incom
net worth can be defin as the differ between asset and liabil at a particular point in
time by compar the subject net worth at the begin and end of a period usual a
calendar year the econom crime investig can determin the increas or decreas in net
worth adjust ar then made for live expens to arriv at incom incom includ
receipt deriv from all sourc thu by subtract fund from known sourc salari
wage interest or dividend for exampl fund from unknown or illeg sourc can
be calcul
the court approv us the networth method in the lead suprem court case of
holland v unit state 348 us 121 1954 along with the three companion case smith v
trace illicit transact investig
3834 2011 fraud examin manual
unit state 348 us 147 1954 friedberg v unit state 348 142 1954 and unit state v
calderon 348 us 160 1954 these case outlin broad principl to govern the trial and
review of case base on the networth method of prove incom
the networth method is often us when sever of the subject asset or liabil have
chang dure the period under examin and when the target financi record ar not
avail
an individu asset liabil and live expens can be determin from a varieti of
sourc such as
the subject
inform or sourc
real estat record
judgment and lien record
bankruptci record
state motor vehicl record
loan applic
financi statement
account work paper
lawsuit and deposit
surveil
credit card applic or statement
tax return
insur record
child support and divorc record
employ applic and salari check
companion or associ
cancel check and deposit item
the question might aris regard why item that do not chang should be includ in the
networth statement particularli sinc thei have no bear on the final result the answer is
that a networth statement give a complet financi pictur of the subject and therefor
should be as complet as possibl so that the target will not be abl to contest it on the
ground that item were omit addition the networth statement can be the
foundat for examin of the subject and a complet statement will prove extrem
valuabl at that time
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3835
there ar two basic method of networth comput the asset method and the expenditur
or sourc and applic of fund method thei ar discuss in detail herein
the asset method should be us when the subject ha invest illeg fund to accumul
wealth and acquir asset caus net worth valu of asset over liabil to increas from
year to year the expenditur method is best us when the subject spend illicit incom on
consum such as travel and entertain that would not caus an increas in
net worth
each method ha similar step begin both method by assembl the financi and
behavior profil identifi all major asset and liabil sourc of incom and major
expens dure the relev period the increas if ani in the subject net worth or the
level of expenditur is then compar to the legitim fund avail unaccount fund
might be infer to come from illicit or hidden sourc
the financi profil
the first step is to prepar the financi profil of the suspect the financi profil is
essenti a financi statement with certain modif and addit that show what the
defend own ow earn and spend at ani given point or over a period of time the
profil might yield direct evid of illeg incom or hidden asset or circumstanti
evid thereof by show that the suspect expenditur exceed known sourc of
incom
the financi profil will identifi most illicit fund that ar deposit to account or
expend in signific amount it will not catch rel small currenc transact
particularli if thei were for conceal activ consum or for unusu onetim
expens such as medic bill
determin the target asset liabil incom and expens from the follow sourc
interview
the target
associ
document from financi sourc eg account banker
bank account record
mortgag and loan file
credit card record
trace illicit transact investig
3836 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return
public record
busi file
real estat file
court record
to prepar the financi profil follow the follow six step
step 1
identifi all signific asset held by the suspect an asset is cash on hand or anyth els
of valu that can be convert into cash
cash on hand is coin and currenc bill coin feder reserv note in the subject
possess on the subject person in the subject s resid or other place in a nomine
hand or in a safedeposit box it doe not includ monei in ani account with a financi
institut when us the networth method the item that mai be the most difficult to
verifi is the amount of cash on hand which is usual claim by defend to be suffici
to account for all or part of the unknown sourc of incom to establish a firm start net
worth it must be shown that the target had no larg cash sum for which he wa not given
credit thi is usual done by offer evid that negat the exist of a cash hoard
such evid might includ
written or oral admiss of the subject concern net worth a sign networth
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand
low earn in preexamin year as shown by record of former employ
andor tax return file by subject
net worth as establish by book and record of the subject
financi statement present for credit or other purpos at a time befor or dure the
period under examin bank loan compani and bond compani ar some of
the better sourc from which to obtain thi type of document
bankruptci befor examin period
prior indebted compromis of overdu debt and avoid of bankruptci
instal bui
histori of low earn and expenditur and check return for insuffici fund a
financi histori cover member of the subject famili also might be help
loss of furnitur and busi becaus of financi reason
receipt of some type of public assist
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3837
step 2
identifi all signific liabil a liabil is an oblig debt aris from an oral or
written promis to pai
step 3
identifi all incom sourc dure the relev time period incom includ monei or other
thing of valu receiv in exchang for servic or good incom is never includ as an
asset loan proce ar not includ as incom but ar treat as an asset that is offset by a
correspond liabil
step 4
identifi all signific expens incur dure the relev period an expens is ani
payment for consum for person or busi reason over the relev time period
expens ar not includ as liabil
step 5
analyz the inform you have collect by us the follow chart
the financi profil
typic asset for each signific asset determin
resid
real estat
bank account
stock and
bond
automobil
insur
cash on hand
jewelri
cloth
collect
pension
home
furnish
boat
when wa it acquir and from whom
how much did it cost
how wa it paid for currenc check cashier
check
what sourc of fund wa us to acquir it
what document exist for the purchas and
where is it
typic liabil for each signific liabil determin
mortgag
other loan
line of credit
credit card
instal purchas
account payabl
what wa the origin amount of the liabil
what is the present balanc due
when wa the liabil incur
what wa the purpos for the loan or debt
how were the proce us and where were thei
deposit
trace illicit transact investig
3838 2011 fraud examin manual
tax and other bill
alimoni and child support
what secur collater if ani wa given for the
debt
what document exist for the transact and
where is it
wa the debt written off as a bad loan for tax
purpos
who wa the creditor or lender
typic sourc of fund
for each sourc of fund determin
salari
gift
rental incom
dividend
interest
sale of asset
insur
proce
commiss
and fee
award
inherit
disabl
payment
what wa the total amount dure a given period
what wa the sourc
how wa it paid for currenc check other mean
when were the fund receiv
where wa it deposit
how wa it spent
what document exist eg w2 or 1099
form and where is it
typic expenditur
for each major expenditur item determin
rent and
mortgag
health cost
interest on
loan
credit card
car payment
travel
cloth
util
food
insur
what wa the total amount spent
how wa it paid for
where were the fund obtai ned to pai the expens
what document exist and where is it
when wa the payment made
the behavior profil
the financi profil might give inaccur or fals neg read unless certain activ
ar identifi which is done through prepar the behavior profil the behavior profil
might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such as larg debt as well as
addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent signific amount of
cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from hi disclos bank account or no
admit sourc of cash incom he must have other undisclos sourc of incom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3839
us the financialbehavior profil as a guid request an interview with the suspect pin
down the suspect incom asset and account otherwis the subject might invent
excus or prepar fals testimoni or document to account for the unexplain incom
networth analysi
ani recipi of fund whether honest or suspect ha onli four wai of dispos of
incom save it bui asset pai off debt or spend it
networth analysi begin with the complet of a suspect financi profil through
identif of the suspect asset liabil incom and expens a networth statement
can be determin onc a networth statement is complet through the identif of a
suspect asset liabil incom and expens chang in the suspect net worth can be
compar to hi known incom and differ can be infer to be from unknown
sourc
compar net worth asset method
again the asset method is advis when it is suspect that the subject ha purchas
asset or otherwis increas hi net worth it can be appli for ani number of year but
ideal it is best to start with the year befor the suspect fraudul activ began the
formula is
asset
liabil
net worth
prior year net worth
net worth increas
live expens
incom or expenditur
fund from known sourc
fund from unknown sourc
in comput the compar net worth these issu should be consid
all asset should be valu at cost not fair market valu subsequ appreci or
depreci of asset is ignor
the amount of fund avail to the subject from legitim sourc should be
estim or comput gener the amount of the subject expenditur
trace illicit transact investig
3840 2011 fraud examin manual
particularli hardtodocu live cost such as food and entertain should be
estim conserv to give the subject the benefit of ani doubt in attempt to
estim person live expens you should consult the us bureau of labor statist
thi agenc publish an annual tabl that detail person live expens such as
util food and ga
alwai attempt to interview the subject to identifi all alleg sourc of fund and to
negat defens that he might rais later
to comput the compar net worth us the asset method perform the follow step
establish the start point gener the year befor the target illeg activ begin
thi will be refer to as year on in the follow comput
comput the target net worth at the end of year on identifi all asset held by the
subject valu at cost includ asset acquir earlier and the amount of current
liabil
the differ between the valu of the asset and the liabil is the target net worth at
year on or open net worth
exampl
year on
asset at cost liabil
resid 100000 mort gage balanc 90000
stock and bond 30000 automobil loan
automobil 20000 balanc 10000
total 150000 total 100000
asset 150000
liabil 100000
net worth 50000
comput the target net worth for year two us the same method
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3841
exampl
year two
asset at cost liabil
resid 100000 mortgag balanc 50000
stock and bond 30000
automobil 20000 automobil loan
cd 50000 balanc 0
total 200000 total 50000
asset 200000
liabil 50000
net worth 150000
note that in the exampl the target net wo rth increas by 100000 dure year two
to determin the sourc of such an increas determin the target known incom
dure year two and subtract known expens for year two
exampl
year two
incom expens
salari 30000 mortgag interest
payment
20000
commiss 20000 live expens 10000
total 50000 total 30000
the differ between the target incom and expens equal the increas or decreas in
net worth from year on to year two which can be attribut to known sourc here it is
20000 subtract the increas in net worth fr om known sourc from the total increas in
net worth to determin the amount from unknown sourc
exampl
total increas in net worth 100000
increas attribut to known sourc 20000
dollar from unknown sourc 80000
repeat the abov step for subsequ year as necessari
trace illicit transact investig
3842 2011 fraud examin manual
expenditur method
the expenditur method also known as the sourc and applic of fund method
compar the suspect known expenditur and known sourc of fund dure a given
period of time ani excess expenditur must be the result of incom from unknown
sourc it is close relat to the networth analysi account variat of the same
principl
the tabl below illustr the formula us to comput net worth us the expenditur
method the step ar discuss in greater detail below
expenditur applic of fund
known sourc of fund
fund from unknown sourc
to comput the subject net worth us the expenditur method follow three step first
establish the subject known expenditur for the relev year expenditur includ the
us or applic of fund for ani purpos includ deposit to bank account purchas
of major asset travel and entertain expens and payment of loan and credit card
debt second identifi all sourc of fund avail to the subject includ loan and gift
as well as cash on hand from previou year third comput the differ between the
amount of the suspect expenditur and hi known incom to determin the amount
attribut to unknown sourc
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3843
exampl
subject year on year two
applic of fund
increas in bank balanc 2000 10000
down payment on resid 10000
purchas of automobil 10000
mortgag payment 8000 20000
credit card payment 5000 10000
other expens 15000 30000
total 40000 80000
less known sourc of fund
cash on hand 1000
salari 30000 38000
interest earn on save
account 1000 2000
loan proce 8000
total 40000 40000
fund from unk nown or illeg sourc 0 40000
the follow exampl demonstr how a networth analysi assist prosecutor in their
amend complaint against a fraud suspect
exampl
r peeri ag 40 the execut director of a fivest commiss plan a lowlevel
radioact wast dump wa charg with two ne w charg of feloni theft peeri wa also
charg with on feder count of wire fraud
peeri wa accus of wire 115000 to a person account in georgia and prosecutor
said thei suspect him of take 600000 he wa also charg with two count of us
commiss fund in nebraska to bui car a 1990 bmw valu at 67000 and a
1991 bmw valu at 92000
peeri wa paid 52000 annual he live in a hous valu at 305000 and at the
time of hi arrest had six luxuri car includ jaguar mercedesbenz and bmw
trace illicit transact investig
3844 2011 fraud examin manual
bank deposit analysi method
the bank deposit analysi method is anoth method to prove unknown sourc of fund by
indirect or circumstanti evid like the other indirect method of proof the bank
deposit method comput incom by show what happen to a subject fund it is
base on the theori that if a subject receiv monei he can onli do two thing with it he
can deposit it or he can spend it
thi method is appli when asset and liabil ar fairli constant from year to year and
indic of extravag expenditur ar nonexist but through investig the
suspect known sourc of incom ar be deposit into financi institut
under thi method incom is prove through analyz bank deposit cancel check and
the subject currenc transact adjust for nonincom item ar made to arriv at
incom a basic formula for the bank deposit method is
total deposit to all account
transfer and redeposit
net deposit to all account
cash expenditur
total receipt from all sourc
fund from known sourc
fund from unknown or illeg sourc
the bank deposit method is recommend as a primari method of proof when most of the
subject incom is deposit and the subject book and record ar unavail withheld
incomplet or maintain on a cash basi us of the bank deposit method is not limit to
these circumst howev even though the target book and record might appear to
be complet and accur the method can still be us and there is no requir to
disprov the accuraci of the book and record
the basic sourc of inform for thi analysi includ interview analys of the book
and record and analys of the bank account a thorough interview will determin the
subject expenditur by cash and check identi fy all bank account and determin all loan
and other receipt
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3845
total deposit
total deposit consist not onli of amount deposit to all bank account maintain or
control by the target but also deposit made to account in save and loan compani
invest trust brokerag hous and credit union total deposit also includ the
accumul increas of cash on hand becaus some subject have bank account in
fictiti name or under special titl such as special account no 1 truste account
or trade account the investig should look for thi type of account dure the
investig if a subject list check on a deposit ticket and deduct an amount paid to him
in cash split deposit onli the net amount of the deposit should be us in comput
total deposit
addit item that must be includ in deposit ar properti and note that the subject
receiv in payment for servic the accept practic is to consid these item as
depositori into which fund have been place for futur us
net deposit
all transfer or exchang between bank account as well as fund that ar redeposit ar
nonincom item and ar subtract from total deposit to yield net deposit failur to
elimin these item would result in an overstat of incom
cash expenditur
cash expenditur consist of the total outlai of fund less net bank disburs the total
outlai of fund includ all payment made by cash or check there is no need to determin
which part wa paid by cash and which part by check total outlai includ but ar not
limit to
purchas of capit asset to invest determin from settlement sheet invoic
statement and the like
loan repay determin from loan ledger of bank or other creditor
live expens can be determin from the same sourc present in the net worth
and expenditur section
purchas busi expens less noncash item such as depreci rental expens
and the like
trace illicit transact investig
3846 2011 fraud examin manual
net bank disburs can be determin by the follow formula
net deposit to all account
begin balanc
net bank fund avail
end balanc
net bank disburs
fund from known sourc includ but ar not limit to salari busi profit
insur proce gift receiv loan and inherit fund from known sourc ar
subtract from total receipt or incom to arriv at fund from unknown or
illeg sourc
rebut defens to indirect method of proof
circumstanti evid of excess incom is often met with the defens that the extra fund
came from cash accumul earlier or from other legitim sourc such as loan from
rel to rebut these defens the fraud examin must pin down the amount of cash on
hand at the begin of the relev period through for exampl amount list on
financi statement or claim in interview and do the follow
obtain a financi histori of the target and spous through interview and other mean
show date and place of employ salari and bonus and ani other relat
incom
determin whether the spous had ani separ sourc of fund that were us to
purchas jointli held asset or deposit in joint account if so the spous must be
includ in the financi profil calcul
claim of a prior substanti cash hoard might be rebut by show that the target
live penuri borrow monei made instal purchas incur larg debt
wa delinqu on account had a poor credit rate or file for bankruptci claim that
cash came from famili or other privat loan might be rebut by show that the
alleg lender wa incap of gener the amount supposedli lent the absenc of
ani document reflect the sourc of the alleg loan no bank account
withdraw and the absenc of other sourc of fund avail to the lender
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3847
the networth analysisif record can be obtai nedi a signific tool in document ill
gotten gain with thi as a basi the follow section cover the major scheme us to
commit fraud against compani and government agenc
