2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Statistical Sampling


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Statistical Sampling 
If an anomaly is found in the financial statements and transactions and further investigation 
is desired, it might be appropriate to pull a statistical sample. By using statistical sampling, 
the examiner can look at fewer transactions rather than the entire population.  
 
There are two basic risks associated with statistical sampling: sampling risk and nonsampling 
risk. Sampling risk  is the probability that the sample is not representative of the population; 
nonsampling risk  is the possibility of making the wrong decision. Nonsampling risk cannot be 
quantified. However, fraud examiners can control it through adequate planning and 
supervision of audit engagements. 
 
When using statistical sampling, you must draw a random sample. That is, each member of 
the population must have an equal chance of being selected. There are two primary types of 
statistical sampling: attribute and discovery. 
 
SAMPLING FOR ATTRIBUTES 
Sampling for attributes is used by auditors or fraud examiners looking for a deviation 
occurrence rate (deviations, errors, and exceptions  are synonyms). When performing this type of 
sampling, you are looking for the presence or absence of a defined condition. 
 
EXAMPLE 
For each sales invoice in the sample, is there a corresponding shipping order? The answer to the 
question can only be “yes” or “no.” If the control condition is that each sales invoice is not 
recorded until there has been a shipping order attached, then any “no” response for a booked 
sale would represent an error. 
 
DISCOVERY SAMPLING 
This is the best type of sampling for auditing for fraud because it is sampling until one 
occurrence is found. Discovery sampling deals with the probability of discovering at least 
one error in a given sample size if the population error is a certain percentage. This type of 
sampling is directed toward a specific objective, such as: 
 
EXAMPLE 
“If I believe some kind of error or irregularity might exist in the records, what sample size will I have to 
audit to have assurance of finding at least one example?” 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Discovery sampling is best used when looking for things such as forged checks or 
intercompany sales that have been improperly classified as sales to outsiders. 
 
RANDOM SAMPLES 
When using the discovery-sampling technique, the selection of samples should be done 
randomly. For a sample to be random, every member of the population must have an equal 
opportunity of being selected.  
 
Items in the population can be numbered and selected by reference to a random number 
table. Or if the items in the population already have numbers (such as check numbers or 
invoice numbers) then a random sample can be selected by using a random number 
generator from a computer software program. To select a random sample, (1) identify a 
number for every item in the population, (2) correspond the random numbers with each 
item in the population, (3) select the route through the random number table, and (4) select 
the sample.  
 
Additionally, make sure that you consistently follow the pattern picked for corresponding 
random numbers to items in the population and that you document the random number 
selection process in the event the sample needs rechecking or additional sample items need 
to be selected for testing. If the sample is selected randomly and the sample is large enough, 
then the sample should represent the population.  
 
DOCUMENTS 
Fraud will often be concealed in questionable documents. Missing or altered documents are 
some of the principal indicators of fraud, and such occurrences should be thoroughly 
investigated. Certain documents are a natural part of the accounting system. However, when 
a pattern of these documents occurs, or an unusual quantity of these documents is noted, 
further examination might be warranted. 
 
The common-sense test should be applied to any document that appears to have 
questionable features under the circumstances, such as amounts too high or too low; odd 
names, times, and places; and identical names and addresses. Fraud can often involve 
questionable journal entries in the records, such as inappropriate charges to expense 
accounts or inventory. For example, large journal entries in the inventory accounts near the 
end of the year might point to a cover-up of inventory theft. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.833 
An overabundant number of voids might mean that a fraudster is voiding legitimate sales 
and pocketing the proceeds. Excessive credit memos might also signal the reversal of 
legitimate sales and the diversion of cash. Too many late charges might indicate that an 
account receivable is delinquent because it is a fictitious account and, therefore, will never be 
paid. Stale items on any reconciliation bear watching. For example, stale outstanding checks 
may indicate attempted concealment of embezzlement losses or diverted cash. Original 
documents, such as invoices, should be used to authorize transactions because photocopied 
or duplicate documents can be subject to manipulation and alteration. 
 



:


statist sampl
if an anomali is found in the financi statement and transact and further investig
is desir it might be appropri to pull a statist sampl by us statist sampl
the examin can look at fewer transact rather than the entir popul
there ar two basic risk associ with statist sampl sampl risk and nonsampl
risk sampl risk is the probabl that the sampl is not repres of the popul
nonsampl risk is the possibl of make the wrong decis nonsampl risk cannot be
quantifi howev fraud examin can control it through adequ plan and
supervis of audit engag
when us statist sampl you must draw a random sampl that is each member of
the popul must have an equal chanc of be select there ar two primari type of
statist sampl attribut and discoveri
sampl for attribut
sampl for attribut is us by auditor or fraud examin look for a deviat
occurr rate deviat error and except ar synonym when perform thi type of
sampl you ar look for the presenc or absenc of a defin condit
exampl
for each sale invoic in the sampl is there a correspond ship order the answer to the
question can onli be ye or no if the control condit is that each sale invoic is not
record until there ha been a ship order attach then ani no respons for a book
sale would repres an error
discoveri sampl
thi is the best type of sampl for audit for fraud becaus it is sampl until on
occurr is found discoveri sampl deal with the probabl of discov at least
on error in a given sampl size if the popul error is a certain percentag thi type of
sampl is direct toward a specif object such as
exampl
if i believ some kind of error or irregular might exist in the record what sampl size will i have to
audit to have assur of find at least on exampl
trace illicit transact investig
3832 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri sampl is best us when look for thing such as forg check or
intercompani sale that have been improperli classifi as sale to outsid
random sampl
when us the discoverysampl techniqu the select of sampl should be done
randomli for a sampl to be random everi member of the popul must have an equal
opportun of be select
item in the popul can be number and select by refer to a random number
tabl or if the item in the popul alreadi have number such as check number or
invoic number then a random sampl can be select by us a random number
gener from a comput softwar program to select a random sampl 1 identifi a
number for everi item in the popul 2 correspond the random number with each
item in the popul 3 select the rout through the random number tabl and 4 select
the sampl
addition make sure that you consist follow the pattern pick for correspond
random number to item in the popul and that you document the random number
select process in the event the sampl need recheck or addit sampl item need
to be select for test if the sampl is select randomli and the sampl is larg enough
then the sampl should repres the popul
document
fraud will often be conceal in question document miss or alter document ar
some of the princip indic of fraud and such occurr should be thoroughli
investig certain document ar a natur part of the account system howev when
a pattern of these document occur or an unusu quantiti of these document is note
further examin might be warrant
the commonsens test should be appli to ani document that appear to have
question featur under the circumst such as amount too high or too low odd
name time and place and ident name and address fraud can often involv
question journal entri in the record such as inappropri charg to expens
account or inventori for exampl larg journal entri in the inventori account near the
end of the year might point to a coverup of inventori theft
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3833
an overabund number of void might mean that a fraudster is void legitim sale
and pocket the proce excess credit memo might also signal the revers of
legitim sale and the divers of cash too mani late charg might indic that an
account receiv is delinqu becaus it is a fictiti account and therefor will never be
paid stale item on ani reconcili bear watch for exampl stale outstand check
mai indic attempt conceal of embezzl loss or divert cash origin
document such as invoic should be us to author transact becaus photocopi
or duplic document can be subject to manipul and alter
