2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Net-Worth Methods


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Net-Worth Methods 
Examining for fraud not only involves the examination of the entity’s books and records, it 
might also entail the estimation of the fraud suspect’s change in net worth or expenditures. 
If fraud is suspected, then using either of the net-worth methods might help in establishing 
evidence of a fraud. 
 
The net-worth method (or comparative net-worth analysis) is used to prove illicit income 
circumstantially, by showing that a person’s assets or expenditures for a given period exceed 
that which can be accounted for from known or admitted sources of income. The net-worth 
method is a reliable method for estimating a person’s ill-gotten gains. The method is used 
extensively by the Internal Revenue Service, especially in drug and money laundering cases. 
 
The net-worth method relies on the familiar balance sheet format readily recognizable in the 
business world and presents a complete financial picture of a subject. It is based on the 
theory that increases or decreases in a person’s net worth during a period, adjusted for living 
expenses, allow a determination of income. 
 
Net worth  can be defined as the difference between assets and liabilities at a particular point in 
time. By comparing the subject’s net worth at the beginning and end of a period, usually a 
calendar year, the economic crime investigator can determine the increase or decrease in net 
worth. Adjustments are then made for living expenses to arrive at income. Income includes 
receipts derived from all sources. Thus, by subtracting funds from known sources (salary, 
wages, interest, or dividends, for example), funds from unknown or illegal sources can  
be calculated. 
 
The courts approved using the net-worth method in the leading Supreme Court case of 
Holland v. United States, 348 U.S. 121 (1954), along with the three companion cases, Smith v. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
United States, 348 U.S. 147 (1954); Friedberg v. United States, 348 142 (1954); and United States v. 
Calderon, 348 U.S. 160 (1954). These cases outlined broad principles to govern the trial and 
review of cases based on the net-worth method of proving income. 
 
The net-worth method is often used when several of the subject’s assets or liabilities have 
changed during the period under examination and when the target’s financial records are not 
available. 
 
An individual’s assets, liabilities, and living expenses can be determined from a variety of 
sources, such as: 
• The subject 
• Informants or sources 
• Real estate records 
• Judgment and lien records 
• Bankruptcy records 
• State motor vehicle records 
• Loan applications 
• Financial statements 
• Accountant’s work papers 
• Lawsuits and depositions 
• Surveillance 
• Credit card applications or statements 
• Tax returns 
• Insurance records 
• Child support and divorce records 
• Employment applications and salary checks 
• Companions or associates 
• Canceled checks and deposited items 
 
The question might arise regarding why items that do not change should be included in the 
net-worth statement, particularly since they have no bearing on the final result. The answer is 
that a net-worth statement gives a complete financial picture of the subject and therefore 
should be as complete as possible so that the target will not be able to contest it on the 
grounds that items were omitted. Additionally, the net-worth statement can be the 
foundation for examination of the subject, and a complete statement will prove extremely 
valuable at that time. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.835 
There are two basic methods of net-worth computation: The asset method and the expenditures  
or sources and applications of funds method. They are discussed in detail herein. 
 
The asset method should be used when the subject has invested illegal funds to accumulate 
wealth and acquire assets, causing net worth (value of assets over liabilities) to increase from 
year to year. The expenditures method  is best used when the subject spends illicit income on 
consumables (such as travel and entertainment) that would not cause an increase in  
net worth. 
 
Each method has similar steps. Begin both methods by assembling the financial and 
behavioral profile. Identify all major assets and liabilities, sources of income, and major 
expenses during the relevant period. The increase, if any, in the subject’s net worth or the 
level of expenditures is then compared to the legitimate funds available. Unaccounted funds 
might be inferred to come from illicit or hidden sources. 
 
THE FINANCIAL PROFILE 
The first step is to prepare the financial profile  of the suspect. The financial profile is 
essentially a financial statement with certain modifications and additions that shows what the 
defendant owns, owes, earns, and spends at any given point or over a period of time. The 
profile might yield direct evidence of illegal income or hidden assets, or circumstantial 
evidence thereof, by showing that the suspect’s expenditures exceeded known sources of 
income. 
 
The financial profile will identify most illicit funds that are deposited to accounts or 
expended in significant amounts. It will not catch relatively small currency transactions, 
particularly if they were for concealed activities, consumables, or for unusual one-time 
expenses such as medical bills. 
 
Determine the target’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses from the following sources: 
• Interviews 
• The target 
• Associates 
• Documents from financial sources (e.g., accountant, banker) 
• Bank account records 
• Mortgage and loan files 
• Credit card records 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tax returns 
• Public records 
• Business filings 
• Real estate filings 
• Court records 
 
To prepare the financial profile, follow the following six steps.  
 
STEP 1 
Identify all significant assets held by the suspect. An asset is cash (on hand) or anything else 
of value that can be converted into cash.  
 
Cash on hand is coin and currency (bills, coins, Federal Reserve notes) in the subject’s 
possession (on the subject’s person, in the subject ’s residence or other place in a nominee’s 
hands, or in a safe-deposit box). It does not include money in any account with a financial 
institution. When using the net-worth method, the item that may be the most difficult to 
verify is the amount of cash on hand, which is usually claimed by defendants to be sufficient 
to account for all or part of the unknown sources of income. To establish a firm starting net 
worth, it must be shown that the target had no large cash sums for which he was not given 
credit. This is usually done by offering evidence that negates the existence of a cash hoard. 
Such evidence might include: 
• Written or oral admissions of the subject concerning net worth (a signed net-worth 
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand) 
• Low earnings in pre-examination years, as shown by records of former employers 
and/or tax returns filed by subject 
• Net worth, as established by books and records of the subject 
• Financial statement presented for credit or other purposes at a time before or during the 
period under examination (banks, loan companies, and bonding companies are some of 
the better sources from which to obtain this type of document) 
• Bankruptcy before examination periods 
• Prior indebtedness, compromise of overdue debts, and avoidance of bankruptcy 
• Installment buying 
• History of low earnings and expenditures, and checks returned for insufficient funds (a 
financial history covering members of the subject’s family also might be helpful) 
• Loss of furniture and business because of financial reasons 
• Receipt of some type of public assistance 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.837 
STEP 2 
Identify all significant liabilities. A liability is an obligation (debt) arising from an oral or 
written promise to pay.  
 
STEP 3 
Identify all income sources during the relevant time period. Income includes money or other 
things of value received in exchange for services or goods. Income is never included as an 
asset. Loan proceeds are not included as income but are treated as an asset that is offset by a 
corresponding liability. 
 
STEP 4 
Identify all significant expenses incurred during the relevant period. An expense is any 
payment for consumables, for personal or business reasons, over the relevant time period. 
Expenses are not included as liabilities. 
 
STEP 5 
Analyze the information you have collected by using the following charts. 
 
The Financial Profile 
 
TYPICAL ASSETS For each significant asset determine : 
 
Residence 
Real estate 
Bank accounts 
Stocks and 
bonds 
Automobiles 
Insurance 
Cash on hand 
 
Jewelry 
Clothing 
Collectibles 
Pensions 
Home 
furnishings 
Boats 
 
—When was it acquired and from whom? 
—How much did it cost?  
—How was it paid for (currency, check, cashier’s 
check)? 
—What source of funds was used to acquire it? 
—What documentation exists for the purchase and 
where is it? 
 
 
 
TYPICAL LIABILITIES For each significant liability determine: 
 
Mortgage(s) 
Other loans 
Lines of credit 
Credit cards  
Installment purchases 
Accounts payable 
 
—What was the original amount of the liability? 
—What is the present balance due? 
—When was the liability incurred? 
—What was the purpose for the loan or debt? 
—How were the proceeds used and where were they 
deposited? 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Taxes and other bills 
Alimony and child support 
— What security (collateral), if any, was given for the 
debt? 
— What documentation exists for the transaction and 
where is it? 
— Was the debt written off as a bad loan for tax 
purposes? 
— Who was the creditor or lender? 
 
 
TYPICAL SOURCES OF FUNDS 
 
For each source of funds determine: 
 
Salary 
Gifts 
Rental income 
Dividends 
Interest 
Sale of assets 
 
Insurance 
proceeds 
Commissions 
and fees 
Awards 
Inheritances 
Disability 
payments 
 
— What was the total amount during a given period? 
— What was the source? 
— How was it paid for (currency, check, other means)? 
— When were the funds received? 
— Where was it deposited? 
— How was it spent? 
— What documentation exists (e.g., W-2 or 1099 
forms) and where is it? 
 
TYPICAL EXPENDITURES 
For each major expenditure item determine : 
 
Rent and 
mortgage 
Health costs 
Interest on 
loans 
Credit cards 
Car payments 
Travel 
 
Clothing 
Utilities 
Food 
Insurance  
 
 
— What was the total amount spent? 
— How was it paid for? 
— Where were the funds obtai ned to pay the expense? 
— What documentation exists and where is it? 
— When was the payment made? 
 
THE BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The financial profile might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless certain activities 
are identified, which is done through preparing the behavioral profile. The behavioral profile 
might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such as large debts, as well as 
additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent significant amounts of 
cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from his disclosed bank accounts, or no 
admitted sources of cash income, he must have  other undisclosed sources of income. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.839 
Using the financial/behavioral profile as a guide, request an interview with the suspect. Pin 
down the suspect’s income, assets, and accounts. Otherwise, the subject might invent 
excuses or prepare false testimony or documentation to account for the unexplained income. 
 



:


networth method
examin for fraud not onli involv the examin of the entiti book and record it
might also entail the estim of the fraud suspect chang in net worth or expenditur
if fraud is suspect then us either of the networth method might help in establish
evid of a fraud
the networth method or compar networth analysi is us to prove illicit incom
circumstanti by show that a person asset or expenditur for a given period exce
that which can be account for from known or admit sourc of incom the networth
method is a reliabl method for estim a person illgotten gain the method is us
extens by the intern revenu servic especi in drug and monei launder case
the networth method reli on the familiar balanc sheet format readili recogniz in the
busi world and present a complet financi pictur of a subject it is base on the
theori that increas or decreas in a person net worth dure a period adjust for live
expens allow a determin of incom
net worth can be defin as the differ between asset and liabil at a particular point in
time by compar the subject net worth at the begin and end of a period usual a
calendar year the econom crime investig can determin the increas or decreas in net
worth adjust ar then made for live expens to arriv at incom incom includ
receipt deriv from all sourc thu by subtract fund from known sourc salari
wage interest or dividend for exampl fund from unknown or illeg sourc can
be calcul
the court approv us the networth method in the lead suprem court case of
holland v unit state 348 us 121 1954 along with the three companion case smith v
trace illicit transact investig
3834 2011 fraud examin manual
unit state 348 us 147 1954 friedberg v unit state 348 142 1954 and unit state v
calderon 348 us 160 1954 these case outlin broad principl to govern the trial and
review of case base on the networth method of prove incom
the networth method is often us when sever of the subject asset or liabil have
chang dure the period under examin and when the target financi record ar not
avail
an individu asset liabil and live expens can be determin from a varieti of
sourc such as
the subject
inform or sourc
real estat record
judgment and lien record
bankruptci record
state motor vehicl record
loan applic
financi statement
account work paper
lawsuit and deposit
surveil
credit card applic or statement
tax return
insur record
child support and divorc record
employ applic and salari check
companion or associ
cancel check and deposit item
the question might aris regard why item that do not chang should be includ in the
networth statement particularli sinc thei have no bear on the final result the answer is
that a networth statement give a complet financi pictur of the subject and therefor
should be as complet as possibl so that the target will not be abl to contest it on the
ground that item were omit addition the networth statement can be the
foundat for examin of the subject and a complet statement will prove extrem
valuabl at that time
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3835
there ar two basic method of networth comput the asset method and the expenditur
or sourc and applic of fund method thei ar discuss in detail herein
the asset method should be us when the subject ha invest illeg fund to accumul
wealth and acquir asset caus net worth valu of asset over liabil to increas from
year to year the expenditur method is best us when the subject spend illicit incom on
consum such as travel and entertain that would not caus an increas in
net worth
each method ha similar step begin both method by assembl the financi and
behavior profil identifi all major asset and liabil sourc of incom and major
expens dure the relev period the increas if ani in the subject net worth or the
level of expenditur is then compar to the legitim fund avail unaccount fund
might be infer to come from illicit or hidden sourc
the financi profil
the first step is to prepar the financi profil of the suspect the financi profil is
essenti a financi statement with certain modif and addit that show what the
defend own ow earn and spend at ani given point or over a period of time the
profil might yield direct evid of illeg incom or hidden asset or circumstanti
evid thereof by show that the suspect expenditur exceed known sourc of
incom
the financi profil will identifi most illicit fund that ar deposit to account or
expend in signific amount it will not catch rel small currenc transact
particularli if thei were for conceal activ consum or for unusu onetim
expens such as medic bill
determin the target asset liabil incom and expens from the follow sourc
interview
the target
associ
document from financi sourc eg account banker
bank account record
mortgag and loan file
credit card record
trace illicit transact investig
3836 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return
public record
busi file
real estat file
court record
to prepar the financi profil follow the follow six step
step 1
identifi all signific asset held by the suspect an asset is cash on hand or anyth els
of valu that can be convert into cash
cash on hand is coin and currenc bill coin feder reserv note in the subject
possess on the subject person in the subject s resid or other place in a nomine
hand or in a safedeposit box it doe not includ monei in ani account with a financi
institut when us the networth method the item that mai be the most difficult to
verifi is the amount of cash on hand which is usual claim by defend to be suffici
to account for all or part of the unknown sourc of incom to establish a firm start net
worth it must be shown that the target had no larg cash sum for which he wa not given
credit thi is usual done by offer evid that negat the exist of a cash hoard
such evid might includ
written or oral admiss of the subject concern net worth a sign networth
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand
low earn in preexamin year as shown by record of former employ
andor tax return file by subject
net worth as establish by book and record of the subject
financi statement present for credit or other purpos at a time befor or dure the
period under examin bank loan compani and bond compani ar some of
the better sourc from which to obtain thi type of document
bankruptci befor examin period
prior indebted compromis of overdu debt and avoid of bankruptci
instal bui
histori of low earn and expenditur and check return for insuffici fund a
financi histori cover member of the subject famili also might be help
loss of furnitur and busi becaus of financi reason
receipt of some type of public assist
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3837
step 2
identifi all signific liabil a liabil is an oblig debt aris from an oral or
written promis to pai
step 3
identifi all incom sourc dure the relev time period incom includ monei or other
thing of valu receiv in exchang for servic or good incom is never includ as an
asset loan proce ar not includ as incom but ar treat as an asset that is offset by a
correspond liabil
step 4
identifi all signific expens incur dure the relev period an expens is ani
payment for consum for person or busi reason over the relev time period
expens ar not includ as liabil
step 5
analyz the inform you have collect by us the follow chart
the financi profil
typic asset for each signific asset determin
resid
real estat
bank account
stock and
bond
automobil
insur
cash on hand
jewelri
cloth
collect
pension
home
furnish
boat
when wa it acquir and from whom
how much did it cost
how wa it paid for currenc check cashier
check
what sourc of fund wa us to acquir it
what document exist for the purchas and
where is it
typic liabil for each signific liabil determin
mortgag
other loan
line of credit
credit card
instal purchas
account payabl
what wa the origin amount of the liabil
what is the present balanc due
when wa the liabil incur
what wa the purpos for the loan or debt
how were the proce us and where were thei
deposit
trace illicit transact investig
3838 2011 fraud examin manual
tax and other bill
alimoni and child support
what secur collater if ani wa given for the
debt
what document exist for the transact and
where is it
wa the debt written off as a bad loan for tax
purpos
who wa the creditor or lender
typic sourc of fund
for each sourc of fund determin
salari
gift
rental incom
dividend
interest
sale of asset
insur
proce
commiss
and fee
award
inherit
disabl
payment
what wa the total amount dure a given period
what wa the sourc
how wa it paid for currenc check other mean
when were the fund receiv
where wa it deposit
how wa it spent
what document exist eg w2 or 1099
form and where is it
typic expenditur
for each major expenditur item determin
rent and
mortgag
health cost
interest on
loan
credit card
car payment
travel
cloth
util
food
insur
what wa the total amount spent
how wa it paid for
where were the fund obtai ned to pai the expens
what document exist and where is it
when wa the payment made
the behavior profil
the financi profil might give inaccur or fals neg read unless certain activ
ar identifi which is done through prepar the behavior profil the behavior profil
might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such as larg debt as well as
addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent signific amount of
cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from hi disclos bank account or no
admit sourc of cash incom he must have other undisclos sourc of incom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3839
us the financialbehavior profil as a guid request an interview with the suspect pin
down the suspect incom asset and account otherwis the subject might invent
excus or prepar fals testimoni or document to account for the unexplain incom
