2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Locating Hidden Assets


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Locating Hidden Assets 
 
Common Asset-Hiding Techniques 
There are many techniques a fraudster might use to hide ill-gotten gains. A target may 
attempt to preserve his assets by opening hidden bank accounts, purchasing real estate 
through a straw or front, or transferring his assets to other parties or to accounts that might 
escape detection. 
 
Transfer to Family Members or Parties Under Their Control 
The most common means of hiding assets, particularly real estate and business interests, is to 
transfer the asset into the hands of another party that will allow the target to maintain 
control. In many cases, the target will transfer the asset to a spouse (or another member of 
the spouse’s family), and a husband might make the transfer in his wife’s maiden name. 
 
Such transfers can be identified through a search of voter registrations, marriage records, and 
probate in the spouse’s maiden name. Transf ers to family members can be detected by 
comparing the target’s previous financial statem ent with the most recent one. Those assets 
appearing on the oldest statement but not appearing on the most recent statement should be 
examined closely to determine the nature of the transaction, the purchaser’s identity, and the 
consideration for the sale. 
 
Children’s or Family Trust 
A target might seek to protect assets by transferring them to a children’s or family trust from 
a personal estate. These assets would then be protected from judgment or bankruptcy 
proceedings in a court of law. If the transfer was made to defeat creditors, however, it can be 
set aside by the court.  
 
Home Mortgage Pay-Down 
In many cases, subjects seek to hide their assets from seizure by prepaying a significant 
portion of their home mortgage. By doing this, the hider may successfully shelter his assets 
in a homestead exemption (as allowed in Texas, Florida, and other states) that will survive 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
bankruptcy or other claims against them. By documenting the mortgage prepayment, the 
fraud examiner can often show undisclosed or hidden income from outside sources. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier’s check for $96,000 was found to ha ve been used as a prepayment to a home 
mortgage. By obtaining the front and back of the cashier’s che ck, fraud examiners were able 
to locate another bank account belonging to the defendant.  
 
Insurance Policies 
Some targets may purchase insurance. Under the terms of a whole life or universal life 
insurance policy, the borrower may make additional payments on the policy. These payments 
accrue at a high interest rate and enhance the overall value of the insurance policy.  
 
A sophisticated subject might deposit substantial monies into an existing insurance policy 
thinking that the fraud examiner will not look beyond the face value of the policy into the 
equity built up by prepayments. The fraud examiner should, therefore, always examine the 
financial statement of a target to locate insurance policies and examine the equity in these 
policies as a potential asset. 
 
Prepaid Credit Cards 
Many credit accounts today permit the card holder to prepay their accounts. Many people 
attempting to hide assets have used the prepayment option to hide cash from creditors. 
Prepayment of credit card accounts can also be found in cash management accounts (CMAs) 
offered by stock brokerage firms. 
 
Savings Bond Purchases 
Drug dealers and tax evaders often use savings bond purchases as a means to conceal  
their ready cash. In several recent cases, defendants in financial crimes have purchased 
bonds in their individual names, their spouses’ names (in their maiden names), or their 
children’s names. 
 
Cashier’s Checks and Traveler’s Checks 
Many criminals purchase cashier’s checks and traveler’s checks to hide their financial 
dealings and reduce the amount of cash they have to carry. By purchasing cashier’s checks or 
traveler’s checks in denominations of less than  $10,000, which is the threshold for filing a 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.849 
Currency Transaction Report (CTR), the criminal can carry negotiable financial instruments 
that can be exchanged almost any place in the world.  
 
Computer Databases 
To begin a computer-based investigation, determine which records are available. Next, 
determine how much record checking is necessary, which records should be focused on, and 
the location of concentration. Areas of concentration might include voter registration 
records, court records, or real estate files.  
 
Locating Assets Through Subpoenas 
Although examiners investigating fraud do not have an absolute right to see non-public 
records, those who are involved in investigations involving civil or criminal proceedings 
might have subpoena power allowing them to obtain such records, including bank account 
and loan records, records from accountants and tax preparers (including income tax returns 
and related documents), mortgage company records, telephone records, credit card 
statements, credit reporting company records, hotel and travel records, telex records, 
overnight package envelopes, and passports. 
 
Locating Assets Offshore 
Some targets might try to hide their assets offshore, often in tax havens and secrecy 
jurisdictions. Historically, some of the most popular offshore jurisdictions have been 
Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, the Netherlands Antilles, and Panama. 
 
To locate offshore assets, fraud examiners should take all of the following steps: 
• Review domestic bank account records for wire transfers or other transactions involving 
offshore bank accounts. 
• Determine whether the subject personally traveled overseas. Overseas travel can often be 
documented from U.S. Customs records available through FinCEN. 
• Attempt to locate the subject’s travel agency. 
 
Attempt to identify means employed to move cash offshore by: 
• Use of multiple cashier’s checks 
• Overnight mail envelopes 
• Other methods 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After funds have been traced offshore, the examiner should look for transfers back to the 
United States. A sophisticated target might use a foreign attorney or bank officer as a trustee 
or front to purchase assets in the United States, or appoint the trustee as manager of a U.S. 
business. 
 
Subjects also might obtain access to their assets offshore by using foreign credit cards. Many 
international institutions now offer MasterCard or Visa accounts, and all account records are 
maintained in the foreign country.  
 
Sophisticated subjects might also obtain foreign passports (in a fictitious name, if requested). 
Some countries offer such passports to people who deposit $25,000 in the state-run financial 
institution. 
 
It may difficult to obtain information on foreign banks, but it is not impossible. D&B 
publishes several guides with information about businesses in Latin America, Europe, and 
other regions of the world. The U.S. Department of Commerce has foreign-country experts 
who can direct you to sources of business information on any country in the world. 
 
Also, with the expansion of the Internet as a means of global communication, information 
on foreign countries and businesses is available through the Internet or through a 
commercial database or online service. 
 
In his book Competitor Intelligence, Leonard Fuld provides a useful chapter on locating 
information on foreign businesses. He suggests the following resources as starting points: 
• Securities brokers with expertise in dealing with foreign businesses 
• The International Trade Commission 
• International trade shows 
• Foreign consulates 
• Foreign chambers of commerce 
• Foreign magazines and directories 
 
Fuld provides a list of consulates, chambers of commerce, magazines, and directories in his 
book. Fuld suggests checking Euromoney 500, which contains profiles of the world’s top 500 
banks, or the Europa World Year Book, which provides basic data on banks around the world. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.851 
The text of newspapers, such as the New York Times  or the Washington Post, may be searched 
for articles on the foreign bank or the foreign country involved. The texts of these and other 
large newspapers are available through online services such as LexisNexis. 
 
If the subject engages in a mail-order or retail business, a simple way to get information 
about his bank accounts is to send him a check. Ronald L. Mendell, in his book How to Do 
Financial Asset Investigations, suggests buying a small item from the subject by using a check. 
When the canceled check is returned, it will provide the name and possibly the account 
number of the subject’s bank. He suggests that if the subject does not engage in mail-order 
sales, the same goal may be accomplished by sending the subject a small “refund” check. 
 
Office of International Affairs 
The U.S. Department of Justice, Office of International Affairs (OIA), in certain 
circumstances, can offer assistance to U.S. fraud examiners seeking to recover  
offshore assets. 
 
OIA is responsible for: 
• Extradition requests 
• Requests for foreign documentary evidence, bank and business records, and other 
official documents 
• Interviews and depositions of foreign witnesses 
• Assistance to obtain appearance of foreign witnesses in U.S. courts 
• Foreign searches and seizures, compelled handwriting exemplars, and  
electronic surveillance 
 
The OIA uses a number of legal resources to  obtain information from foreign countries, 
such as letters rogatory and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties  (MLATs). 
 
LETTERS ROGATORY 
Letters Rogatory are formal requests by the courts of one country to the courts of another 
country.  
 
The information needed for a Letter Rogatory request is as follows: 
• The facts of the case showing at least a reasonable suspicion that the offense under 
investigation might have been committed 
• The names and identifying information of people or entities involved in the matter 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The names and identifying information of witnesses or entities whose names might be 
on bank records (if accounts are held in other names) 
• The names, addresses, and other information concerning banks, businesses, or bank 
account numbers 
• The offenses being investigated or prosecuted in the United States, to include penalties 
• The assistance requested of the foreign country, whether it is documents, testimony, 
freezing of assets, etc. (If you want a foreign magistrate to question a witness, write out 
the questions that you want the witness to be asked, even if you ask to be present during 
the questioning.) 
• The procedures to be followed (how to authenticate business documents and records for 
use in U.S. courts) 
 
The procedure for making formal requests by a Letter Rogatory is as follows: 
• Call the OIA team handling the relevant part of the world concerning the search for 
guidance and assistance. 
• Draft a Letter Rogatory following an exemplar  or other materials provided by the OIA. 
• Have the OIA representative review and approve the draft. 
• The prosecutor will then file a motion in federal court for issuance of a Letter Rogatory, 
together with a memorandum in support and proposed order (submit two copies, one 
for the clerk and one for the foreign court, to be signed by the judge). 
• The judge signs both Letters Rogatory. 
• File one signed Letter Rogatory with the court clerk. 
• Have the court clerk authenticate the second signed Letter Rogatory either via apostille 
or exemplification certificate. 
• Have the Letter Rogatory translated into the proper language. 
• Send the signed Letter Rogatory and translation to the OIA for transmission through 
diplomatic channels to the proper foreign government. 
• The Minister of Justice in the foreign country normally presents the Letter Rogatory to 
the appropriate court. 
• The foreign court determines whether to execute the Letter Rogatory. If the 
determination is favorable, the court then obtains the documents, testimony, and other 
information. 
• Evidence resulting from the execution of the Letter Rogatory is returned through 
diplomatic channels to the OIA. 
• The OIA will then forward the information to the prosecutor. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.853 
Letters Rogatory should be written in simple, non-technical English and should not include 
unnecessary information that may confuse courts in the receiving foreign state. Avoid use of 
the term discovery .” Similarly, to avoid the appearance of  a fishing expedition that may result 
in refusal of the foreign country to execute the request, try not to use phrases such as any and 
all documents. Requests for documents should be as specific as possible. If particular 
procedures to be followed by the foreign court are preferable, include the specifics in the 
Letter Rogatory (for example, verbatim transcript, place witness under oath, or permission 
for U.S. or foreign counsel to attend or participate in proceedings if possible).  
 
MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE TREATIES 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are treaties between the United States and 
foreign countries that provide for the exchange of information and documents relating to 
narcotics, money laundering, and other financial crimes.  
 
Requests for foreign assistance under Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are usually 
quicker and more efficient than filing Letters Rogatory. The procedure for making formal 
requests by MLAT is as follows: 
• No U.S. court involvement is required. 
• The prosecutor calls the OIA for guidance and will send a draft request to the OIA for 
editing. 
• When the OIA director approves the request, the OIA transmits the request to the 
foreign central or competent authority. 
• If a translation is required, the requesting agency is responsible for obtaining it. 
• The OIA transmits the translation to the requested country. 
• The requested country’s proper authority determines whether the request meets treaty 
requirements and, if it does, transmits the request to the appropriate recorder agency  
 for execution. 
• The executing authority transmits the evidence through the proper authority to the OIA, 
which forwards it to the prosecutor. 
• The fraud examiner/prosecutor should inspect the evidence for responsiveness and 
completeness, as well as certificates of authenticity of business records (notify the OIA at 
once of any problems). 
 
The United States currently has bilateral MLATs in force with the following countries: 
Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Belgium, Brazil, British Virgin Islands, Ca nada, the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Cyprus, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Czech Republic, Dominica, Egypt, Estonia, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Grenada, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, India,  Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, 
Korea, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Montserrat, Morocco, the 
Netherlands, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands, Turkey, United 
Kingdom, Uruguay, and Venezuela. 
 
Another method of obtaining foreign bank or business records is by obtaining a release and 
consent form from the defendant. Execution of such a waiver can be compelled by order of 
a U.S. court. This procedure is not universally accepted, particularly in Switzerland, the 
Channel Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands, or the Cayman Islands. 
 
Public Records 
Of course, a great deal of information that is useful in tracing illicit transactions, particularly 
real and personal property filings, is a matter of public record. For more information, see the 
“Sources of Information” and “Accessing Information Online” chapters. 
 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.901 



:


locat hidden asset
common assethid techniqu
there ar mani techniqu a fraudster might us to hide illgotten gain a target mai
attempt to preserv hi asset by open hidden bank account purchas real estat
through a straw or front or transfer hi asset to other parti or to account that might
escap detect
transfer to famili member or parti under their control
the most common mean of hide asset particularli real estat and busi interest is to
transfer the asset into the hand of anoth parti that will allow the target to maintain
control in mani case the target will transfer the asset to a spous or anoth member of
the spous famili and a husband might make the transfer in hi wife maiden name
such transfer can be identifi through a search of voter registr marriag record and
probat in the spous maiden name transf er to famili member can be detect by
compar the target previou financi statem ent with the most recent on those asset
appear on the oldest statement but not appear on the most recent statement should be
examin close to determin the natur of the transact the purchas ident and the
consider for the sale
children or famili trust
a target might seek to protect asset by transfer them to a children or famili trust from
a person estat these asset would then be protect from judgment or bankruptci
proceed in a court of law if the transfer wa made to defeat creditor howev it can be
set asid by the court
home mortgag paydown
in mani case subject seek to hide their asset from seizur by prepai a signific
portion of their home mortgag by do thi the hider mai successfulli shelter hi asset
in a homestead exempt as allow in texa florida and other state that will surviv
trace illicit transact investig
3848 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci or other claim against them by document the mortgag prepay the
fraud examin can often show undisclos or hidden incom from outsid sourc
exampl
a cashier check for 96000 wa found to ha ve been us as a prepay to a home
mortgag by obtain the front and back of the cashier che ck fraud examin were abl
to locat anoth bank account belong to the defend
insur polici
some target mai purchas insur under the term of a whole life or univers life
insur polici the borrow mai make addit payment on the polici these payment
accru at a high interest rate and enhanc the overal valu of the insur polici
a sophist subject might deposit substanti moni into an exist insur polici
think that the fraud examin will not look beyond the face valu of the polici into the
equiti built up by prepay the fraud examin should therefor alwai examin the
financi statement of a target to locat insur polici and examin the equiti in these
polici as a potenti asset
prepaid credit card
mani credit account todai permit the card holder to prepai their account mani peopl
attempt to hide asset have us the prepay option to hide cash from creditor
prepay of credit card account can also be found in cash manag account cma
offer by stock brokerag firm
save bond purchas
drug dealer and tax evad often us save bond purchas as a mean to conceal
their readi cash in sever recent case defend in financi crime have purchas
bond in their individu name their spous name in their maiden name or their
children name
cashier check and travel check
mani crimin purchas cashier check and travel check to hide their financi
deal and reduc the amount of cash thei have to carri by purchas cashier check or
travel check in denomin of less than 10000 which is the threshold for file a
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3849
currenc transact report ctr the crimin can carri negoti financi instrument
that can be exchang almost ani place in the world
comput databas
to begin a computerbas investig determin which record ar avail next
determin how much record check is necessari which record should be focus on and
the locat of concentr area of concentr might includ voter registr
record court record or real estat file
locat asset through subpoena
although examin investig fraud do not have an absolut right to see nonpubl
record those who ar involv in investig involv civil or crimin proceed
might have subpoena power allow them to obtain such record includ bank account
and loan record record from account and tax prepar includ incom tax return
and relat document mortgag compani record telephon record credit card
statement credit report compani record hotel and travel record telex record
overnight packag envelop and passport
locat asset offshor
some target might try to hide their asset offshor often in tax haven and secreci
jurisdict histor some of the most popular offshor jurisdict have been
switzerland the cayman island the netherland antil and panama
to locat offshor asset fraud examin should take all of the follow step
review domest bank account record for wire transfer or other transact involv
offshor bank account
determin whether the subject person travel oversea oversea travel can often be
document from us custom record avail through fincen
attempt to locat the subject travel agenc
attempt to identifi mean emploi to move cash offshor by
us of multipl cashier check
overnight mail envelop
other method
trace illicit transact investig
3850 2011 fraud examin manual
after fund have been trace offshor the examin should look for transfer back to the
unit state a sophist target might us a foreign attornei or bank offic as a truste
or front to purchas asset in the unit state or appoint the truste as manag of a us
busi
subject also might obtain access to their asset offshor by us foreign credit card mani
intern institut now offer mastercard or visa account and all account record ar
maintain in the foreign countri
sophist subject might also obtain foreign passport in a fictiti name if request
some countri offer such passport to peopl who deposit 25000 in the staterun financi
institut
it mai difficult to obtain inform on foreign bank but it is not imposs db
publish sever guid with inform about busi in latin america europ and
other region of the world the us depart of commerc ha foreigncountri expert
who can direct you to sourc of busi inform on ani countri in the world
also with the expans of the internet as a mean of global commun inform
on foreign countri and busi is avail through the internet or through a
commerci databas or onlin servic
in hi book competitor intellig leonard fuld provid a us chapter on locat
inform on foreign busi he suggest the follow resourc as start point
secur broker with expertis in deal with foreign busi
the intern trade commiss
intern trade show
foreign consul
foreign chamber of commerc
foreign magazin and directori
fuld provid a list of consul chamber of commerc magazin and directori in hi
book fuld suggest check euromonei 500 which contain profil of the world top 500
bank or the europa world year book which provid basic data on bank around the world
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3851
the text of newspap such as the new york time or the washington post mai be search
for articl on the foreign bank or the foreign countri involv the text of these and other
larg newspap ar avail through onlin servic such as lexisnexi
if the subject engag in a mailord or retail busi a simpl wai to get inform
about hi bank account is to send him a check ronald l mendel in hi book how to do
financi asset investig suggest bui a small item from the subject by us a check
when the cancel check is return it will provid the name and possibl the account
number of the subject bank he suggest that if the subject doe not engag in mailord
sale the same goal mai be accomplish by send the subject a small refund check
offic of intern affair
the us depart of justic offic of intern affair oia in certain
circumst can offer assist to us fraud examin seek to recov
offshor asset
oia is respons for
extradit request
request for foreign documentari evid bank and busi record and other
offici document
interview and deposit of foreign wit
assist to obtain appear of foreign wit in us court
foreign search and seizur compel handwrit exemplar and
electron surveil
the oia us a number of legal resourc to obtain inform from foreign countri
such as letter rogatori and mutual legal assist treati mlat
letter rogatori
letter rogatori ar formal request by the court of on countri to the court of anoth
countri
the inform need for a letter rogatori request is as follow
the fact of the case show at least a reason suspicion that the offens under
investig might have been commit
the name and identifi inform of peopl or entiti involv in the matter
trace illicit transact investig
3852 2011 fraud examin manual
the name and identifi inform of wit or entiti whose name might be
on bank record if account ar held in other name
the name address and other inform concern bank busi or bank
account number
the offens be investig or prosecut in the unit state to includ penalti
the assist request of the foreign countri whether it is document testimoni
freez of asset etc if you want a foreign magistr to question a wit write out
the question that you want the wit to be ask even if you ask to be present dure
the question
the procedur to be follow how to authent busi document and record for
us in us court
the procedur for make formal request by a letter rogatori is as follow
call the oia team handl the relev part of the world concern the search for
guidanc and assist
draft a letter rogatori follow an exemplar or other materi provid by the oia
have the oia repres review and approv the draft
the prosecutor will then file a motion in feder court for issuanc of a letter rogatori
togeth with a memorandum in support and propos order submit two copi on
for the clerk and on for the foreign court to be sign by the judg
the judg sign both letter rogatori
file on sign letter rogatori with the court clerk
have the court clerk authent the second sign letter rogatori either via apostil
or exemplif certif
have the letter rogatori translat into the proper languag
send the sign letter rogatori and translat to the oia for transmiss through
diplomat channel to the proper foreign govern
the minist of justic in the foreign countri normal present the letter rogatori to
the appropri court
the foreign court determin whether to execut the letter rogatori if the
determin is favor the court then obtain the document testimoni and other
inform
evid result from the execut of the letter rogatori is return through
diplomat channel to the oia
the oia will then forward the inform to the prosecutor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3853
letter rogatori should be written in simpl nontechn english and should not includ
unnecessari inform that mai confus court in the receiv foreign state avoid us of
the term discoveri similarli to avoid the appear of a fish expedit that mai result
in refus of the foreign countri to execut the request try not to us phrase such as ani and
all document request for document should be as specif as possibl if particular
procedur to be follow by the foreign court ar prefer includ the specif in the
letter rogatori for exampl verbatim transcript place wit under oath or permiss
for us or foreign counsel to attend or particip in proceed if possibl
mutual legal assist treati
mutual legal assist treati mlat ar treati between the unit state and
foreign countri that provid for the exchang of inform and document relat to
narcot monei launder and other financi crime
request for foreign assist under mutual legal assist treati mlat ar usual
quicker and more effici than file letter rogatori the procedur for make formal
request by mlat is as follow
no us court involv is requir
the prosecutor call the oia for guidanc and will send a draft request to the oia for
edit
when the oia director approv the request the oia transmit the request to the
foreign central or compet author
if a translat is requir the request agenc is respons for obtain it
the oia transmit the translat to the request countri
the request countri proper author determin whether the request meet treati
requir and if it doe transmit the request to the appropri record agenc
for execut
the execut author transmit the evid through the proper author to the oia
which forward it to the prosecutor
the fraud examinerprosecutor should inspect the evid for respons and
complet as well as certif of authent of busi record notifi the oia at
onc of ani problem
the unit state current ha bilater mlat in forc with the follow countri
anguilla antigua and barbuda argentina australia austria bahama barbado beliz
belgium brazil british virgin island ca nada the cayman island colombia cypru
trace illicit transact investig
3854 2011 fraud examin manual
czech republ dominica egypt estonia european union finland franc germani
greec grenada hong kong sar hungari india ireland israel itali jamaica japan
korea latvia liechtenstein lithuania luxembourg mexico montserrat morocco the
netherland panama the philippin poland romania russian feder saint kitt and
nevi saint lucia saint vincent and the grenadin south africa spain sweden
switzerland thailand trinidad and tobago turk and caico island turkei unit
kingdom uruguai and venezuela
anoth method of obtain foreign bank or busi record is by obtain a releas and
consent form from the defend execut of such a waiver can be compel by order of
a us court thi procedur is not univers accept particularli in switzerland the
channel island the turk and caico island or the cayman island
public record
of cours a great deal of inform that is us in trace illicit transact particularli
real and person properti file is a matter of public record for more inform see the
sourc of inform and access inform onlin chapter
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3901
