2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Locating Hidden Assets/Office of International Affairs


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Office of International Affairs 
The U.S. Department of Justice, Office of International Affairs (OIA), in certain 
circumstances, can offer assistance to U.S. fraud examiners seeking to recover  
offshore assets. 
 
OIA is responsible for: 
• Extradition requests 
• Requests for foreign documentary evidence, bank and business records, and other 
official documents 
• Interviews and depositions of foreign witnesses 
• Assistance to obtain appearance of foreign witnesses in U.S. courts 
• Foreign searches and seizures, compelled handwriting exemplars, and  
electronic surveillance 
 
The OIA uses a number of legal resources to  obtain information from foreign countries, 
such as letters rogatory and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties  (MLATs). 
 
LETTERS ROGATORY 
Letters Rogatory are formal requests by the courts of one country to the courts of another 
country.  
 
The information needed for a Letter Rogatory request is as follows: 
• The facts of the case showing at least a reasonable suspicion that the offense under 
investigation might have been committed 
• The names and identifying information of people or entities involved in the matter 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The names and identifying information of witnesses or entities whose names might be 
on bank records (if accounts are held in other names) 
• The names, addresses, and other information concerning banks, businesses, or bank 
account numbers 
• The offenses being investigated or prosecuted in the United States, to include penalties 
• The assistance requested of the foreign country, whether it is documents, testimony, 
freezing of assets, etc. (If you want a foreign magistrate to question a witness, write out 
the questions that you want the witness to be asked, even if you ask to be present during 
the questioning.) 
• The procedures to be followed (how to authenticate business documents and records for 
use in U.S. courts) 
 
The procedure for making formal requests by a Letter Rogatory is as follows: 
• Call the OIA team handling the relevant part of the world concerning the search for 
guidance and assistance. 
• Draft a Letter Rogatory following an exemplar  or other materials provided by the OIA. 
• Have the OIA representative review and approve the draft. 
• The prosecutor will then file a motion in federal court for issuance of a Letter Rogatory, 
together with a memorandum in support and proposed order (submit two copies, one 
for the clerk and one for the foreign court, to be signed by the judge). 
• The judge signs both Letters Rogatory. 
• File one signed Letter Rogatory with the court clerk. 
• Have the court clerk authenticate the second signed Letter Rogatory either via apostille 
or exemplification certificate. 
• Have the Letter Rogatory translated into the proper language. 
• Send the signed Letter Rogatory and translation to the OIA for transmission through 
diplomatic channels to the proper foreign government. 
• The Minister of Justice in the foreign country normally presents the Letter Rogatory to 
the appropriate court. 
• The foreign court determines whether to execute the Letter Rogatory. If the 
determination is favorable, the court then obtains the documents, testimony, and other 
information. 
• Evidence resulting from the execution of the Letter Rogatory is returned through 
diplomatic channels to the OIA. 
• The OIA will then forward the information to the prosecutor. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.853 
Letters Rogatory should be written in simple, non-technical English and should not include 
unnecessary information that may confuse courts in the receiving foreign state. Avoid use of 
the term discovery .” Similarly, to avoid the appearance of  a fishing expedition that may result 
in refusal of the foreign country to execute the request, try not to use phrases such as any and 
all documents. Requests for documents should be as specific as possible. If particular 
procedures to be followed by the foreign court are preferable, include the specifics in the 
Letter Rogatory (for example, verbatim transcript, place witness under oath, or permission 
for U.S. or foreign counsel to attend or participate in proceedings if possible).  
 
MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE TREATIES 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are treaties between the United States and 
foreign countries that provide for the exchange of information and documents relating to 
narcotics, money laundering, and other financial crimes.  
 
Requests for foreign assistance under Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are usually 
quicker and more efficient than filing Letters Rogatory. The procedure for making formal 
requests by MLAT is as follows: 
• No U.S. court involvement is required. 
• The prosecutor calls the OIA for guidance and will send a draft request to the OIA for 
editing. 
• When the OIA director approves the request, the OIA transmits the request to the 
foreign central or competent authority. 
• If a translation is required, the requesting agency is responsible for obtaining it. 
• The OIA transmits the translation to the requested country. 
• The requested country’s proper authority determines whether the request meets treaty 
requirements and, if it does, transmits the request to the appropriate recorder agency  
 for execution. 
• The executing authority transmits the evidence through the proper authority to the OIA, 
which forwards it to the prosecutor. 
• The fraud examiner/prosecutor should inspect the evidence for responsiveness and 
completeness, as well as certificates of authenticity of business records (notify the OIA at 
once of any problems). 
 
The United States currently has bilateral MLATs in force with the following countries: 
Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Belgium, Brazil, British Virgin Islands, Ca nada, the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Cyprus, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Czech Republic, Dominica, Egypt, Estonia, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Grenada, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, India,  Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, 
Korea, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Montserrat, Morocco, the 
Netherlands, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands, Turkey, United 
Kingdom, Uruguay, and Venezuela. 
 
Another method of obtaining foreign bank or business records is by obtaining a release and 
consent form from the defendant. Execution of such a waiver can be compelled by order of 
a U.S. court. This procedure is not universally accepted, particularly in Switzerland, the 
Channel Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands, or the Cayman Islands. 
 



:


offic of intern affair
the us depart of justic offic of intern affair oia in certain
circumst can offer assist to us fraud examin seek to recov
offshor asset
oia is respons for
extradit request
request for foreign documentari evid bank and busi record and other
offici document
interview and deposit of foreign wit
assist to obtain appear of foreign wit in us court
foreign search and seizur compel handwrit exemplar and
electron surveil
the oia us a number of legal resourc to obtain inform from foreign countri
such as letter rogatori and mutual legal assist treati mlat
letter rogatori
letter rogatori ar formal request by the court of on countri to the court of anoth
countri
the inform need for a letter rogatori request is as follow
the fact of the case show at least a reason suspicion that the offens under
investig might have been commit
the name and identifi inform of peopl or entiti involv in the matter
trace illicit transact investig
3852 2011 fraud examin manual
the name and identifi inform of wit or entiti whose name might be
on bank record if account ar held in other name
the name address and other inform concern bank busi or bank
account number
the offens be investig or prosecut in the unit state to includ penalti
the assist request of the foreign countri whether it is document testimoni
freez of asset etc if you want a foreign magistr to question a wit write out
the question that you want the wit to be ask even if you ask to be present dure
the question
the procedur to be follow how to authent busi document and record for
us in us court
the procedur for make formal request by a letter rogatori is as follow
call the oia team handl the relev part of the world concern the search for
guidanc and assist
draft a letter rogatori follow an exemplar or other materi provid by the oia
have the oia repres review and approv the draft
the prosecutor will then file a motion in feder court for issuanc of a letter rogatori
togeth with a memorandum in support and propos order submit two copi on
for the clerk and on for the foreign court to be sign by the judg
the judg sign both letter rogatori
file on sign letter rogatori with the court clerk
have the court clerk authent the second sign letter rogatori either via apostil
or exemplif certif
have the letter rogatori translat into the proper languag
send the sign letter rogatori and translat to the oia for transmiss through
diplomat channel to the proper foreign govern
the minist of justic in the foreign countri normal present the letter rogatori to
the appropri court
the foreign court determin whether to execut the letter rogatori if the
determin is favor the court then obtain the document testimoni and other
inform
evid result from the execut of the letter rogatori is return through
diplomat channel to the oia
the oia will then forward the inform to the prosecutor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3853
letter rogatori should be written in simpl nontechn english and should not includ
unnecessari inform that mai confus court in the receiv foreign state avoid us of
the term discoveri similarli to avoid the appear of a fish expedit that mai result
in refus of the foreign countri to execut the request try not to us phrase such as ani and
all document request for document should be as specif as possibl if particular
procedur to be follow by the foreign court ar prefer includ the specif in the
letter rogatori for exampl verbatim transcript place wit under oath or permiss
for us or foreign counsel to attend or particip in proceed if possibl
mutual legal assist treati
mutual legal assist treati mlat ar treati between the unit state and
foreign countri that provid for the exchang of inform and document relat to
narcot monei launder and other financi crime
request for foreign assist under mutual legal assist treati mlat ar usual
quicker and more effici than file letter rogatori the procedur for make formal
request by mlat is as follow
no us court involv is requir
the prosecutor call the oia for guidanc and will send a draft request to the oia for
edit
when the oia director approv the request the oia transmit the request to the
foreign central or compet author
if a translat is requir the request agenc is respons for obtain it
the oia transmit the translat to the request countri
the request countri proper author determin whether the request meet treati
requir and if it doe transmit the request to the appropri record agenc
for execut
the execut author transmit the evid through the proper author to the oia
which forward it to the prosecutor
the fraud examinerprosecutor should inspect the evid for respons and
complet as well as certif of authent of busi record notifi the oia at
onc of ani problem
the unit state current ha bilater mlat in forc with the follow countri
anguilla antigua and barbuda argentina australia austria bahama barbado beliz
belgium brazil british virgin island ca nada the cayman island colombia cypru
trace illicit transact investig
3854 2011 fraud examin manual
czech republ dominica egypt estonia european union finland franc germani
greec grenada hong kong sar hungari india ireland israel itali jamaica japan
korea latvia liechtenstein lithuania luxembourg mexico montserrat morocco the
netherland panama the philippin poland romania russian feder saint kitt and
nevi saint lucia saint vincent and the grenadin south africa spain sweden
switzerland thailand trinidad and tobago turk and caico island turkei unit
kingdom uruguai and venezuela
anoth method of obtain foreign bank or busi record is by obtain a releas and
consent form from the defend execut of such a waiver can be compel by order of
a us court thi procedur is not univers accept particularli in switzerland the
channel island the turk and caico island or the cayman island
