2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Fraud by Medical Institutions/Improper Relationships with Physicians


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Improper Relationships with Physicians 
Certain relationships between hospitals and physicians result in fraud to the insurer. For 
instance, a hospital provides no or token reimbursement to pathologists for Medicare Part A 
services in return for the opportunity to perform and bill Part B services at that hospital. 
 
The following transactions are generally regarded as suspect: 
• Payment of any sort of incentive by the hospital each time a physician refers a patient to 
the hospital. 
• Provision of free or significantly discounted billing, nursing, or other staff services. 
• Free training for a physician’s office staff in areas such as management techniques, CPT 
coding, and laboratory techniques. 
• Guarantees that provide that, if the physician’s income fails to reach a predetermined 
level, the hospital will supplement the remainder up to a certain amount. 
• Low-interest or interest-free loans, or loans that may be forgiven if a physician refers 
patients to the hospital. 
• Payment of the cost of a physician’s travel and expenses for conferences. 
• Payment for a physician’s continuing education courses. 
• Coverage on the hospital’s group health insurance plan at an inappropriate or very  
low cost. 
• Payment for services, such as consultation at the hospital, that require few, if any, 
substantive duties by the physician, or payment for services in excess of the fair market 
value of services rendered. 
 



:


improp relationship with physician
certain relationship between hospit and physician result in fraud to the insur for
instanc a hospit provid no or token reimburs to pathologist for medicar part a
servic in return for the opportun to perform and bill part b servic at that hospit
the follow transact ar gener regard as suspect
payment of ani sort of incent by the hospit each time a physician refer a patient to
the hospit
provis of free or significantli discount bill nurs or other staff servic
free train for a physician offic staff in area such as manag techniqu cpt
code and laboratori techniqu
guarante that provid that if the physician incom fail to reach a predetermin
level the hospit will supplement the remaind up to a certain amount
lowinterest or interestfre loan or loan that mai be forgiven if a physician refer
patient to the hospit
payment of the cost of a physician travel and expens for confer
payment for a physician continu educ cours
coverag on the hospit group health insur plan at an inappropri or veri
low cost
payment for servic such as consult at the hospit that requir few if ani
substant duti by the physician or payment for servic in excess of the fair market
valu of servic render
