2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Fraud by Medical Institutions/Rent-a-Patient Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Rent-a-Patient Schemes 
So called “rent-a-patient” schemes involve paying individuals to undergo unnecessary 
medical procedures that are then billed to the patient’s insurance. Rent-a-patient schemes 
typically begin with the leasing of a sham medical clinic. Past investigations show that these 
clinics tend to be nondescript, often within shopping centers, and in destitute sections of 
town. Almost always, the lessee of the clinic is involved in the criminal organization of the 
scheme. Once a sham clinic is in place, recruiters (a.k.a., “coyotes” or “cappers”) are hired to 
solicit low-income individuals, who speak little English, and offer them money in exchange 
for submitting to “minor” surgical procedures. Recruiters are often former criminals, for it is 
not as dangerous to deal patients, as it is to deal drugs, and can be much more lucrative 
(average $2,000 per willing participant). 
 
EXAMPLE 
A surgery center paid hundreds of dollars to patients who endured largely unnecessary 
operations and then falsely charged the go vernment. One of the operations involved 
collapsing the patient’s lung to snip a nerve that would supposedly control “sweaty palms.” 
The surgery did stop the patient’s not-so-sweaty palms from perspiring; it also caused the 
patient to lose strength in his hands, and sweat profusely on other parts of his body. 
 
Recruiters will scour low-income housing projects, elderly neighborhoods, and factories for 
victims. Once recruiters have convinced an individual to become a willing participant, they 
will request a copy of the individual’s benefit ca rd to confirm benefits prior to subjecting the 
patient to an unnecessary treatment. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1235 
Recruiters will drive the patients, usually across state lines, to small “out of network” sham 
clinics. Along the way, the recruiter will advise each patient to describe particular false and 
embellished symptoms to the health professional at the clinic, such as: “I sweat too much”; 
“My stomach is bothering me”; “My nose hurts.” Such descriptions will later be used by the 
scam clinic to create medical charts, justifying a particular surgical procedure. Following a 
night of fast food and a cheap hotel, the patients are driven to a clinic. The patients then 
wait in line, sign an informed consent form, and promise to give the clinic all the checks 
thereafter received. Following administrative procedures, the patients briefly meet with a 
doctor and undergo the procedures that have been predetermined for them. Later that 
evening or the next day, the recruiter will give the patients a few hundred bucks and drive 
the patients home. 
 
After rendering services, the provider will bill the patients’ insurance company, Medicare, or 
Medicaid for the unnecessary procedures beyond the usual and customary cost (past 
investigations evidence up to 5,000 percent above average market price). The claims will 
likely include fees for surgical supplies and medical equipment that were never used or 
distributed. Some insurers reimburse patients directly for out-of-network claims, thereby 
requiring the patient to pay the facility. However, because the patients targeted in rent-a-
 patient scams are often indigent, and believe they deserve the money for enduring the 
unnecessary procedures, it is common for them to deposit or cash the checks. It is a cycle 
whereby the victims are not only used to perpetrate the fraud, but in the end become 
fraudsters themselves. 
 
Insurance companies have difficulty determining when rent-a-patient schemes are being 
committed because their claims systems can only compare codes, and cannot determine the 
usual and customary cost for a particular procedure. To make matters worse, some states 
have prompt pay laws, requiring claims to be paid within a period of time, such as 45-days. 
Rapid claims turnover inevitably leads to poor oversight regarding fraud-related claims. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1236                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Source: U.S. GAO Report: Health Care Fraud: Schemes to Defraud Medicare, Medicaid, and Private Health Care 
Insurers  (July 2000).  
 



:


rentapati scheme
so call rentapati scheme involv pai individu to undergo unnecessari
medic procedur that ar then bill to the patient insur rentapati scheme
typic begin with the leas of a sham medic clinic past investig show that these
clinic tend to be nondescript often within shop center and in destitut section of
town almost alwai the lesse of the clinic is involv in the crimin organ of the
scheme onc a sham clinic is in place recruit aka coyot or capper ar hire to
solicit lowincom individu who speak littl english and offer them monei in exchang
for submit to minor surgic procedur recruit ar often former crimin for it is
not as danger to deal patient as it is to deal drug and can be much more lucr
averag 2000 per will particip
exampl
a surgeri center paid hundr of dollar to patient who endur larg unnecessari
oper and then fals charg the go vernment on of the oper involv
collaps the patient lung to snip a nerv that would supposedli control sweati palm
the surgeri did stop the patient notsosweati palm from perspir it also caus the
patient to lose strength in hi hand and sweat profus on other part of hi bodi
recruit will scour lowincom hous project elderli neighborhood and factori for
victim onc recruit have convinc an individu to becom a will particip thei
will request a copi of the individu benefit ca rd to confirm benefit prior to subject the
patient to an unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11235
recruit will drive the patient usual across state line to small out of network sham
clinic along the wai the recruit will advis each patient to describ particular fals and
embellish symptom to the health profession at the clinic such as i sweat too much
my stomach is bother me my nose hurt such descript will later be us by the
scam clinic to creat medic chart justifi a particular surgic procedur follow a
night of fast food and a cheap hotel the patient ar driven to a clinic the patient then
wait in line sign an inform consent form and promis to give the clinic all the check
thereaft receiv follow administr procedur the patient briefli meet with a
doctor and undergo the procedur that have been predetermin for them later that
even or the next dai the recruit will give the patient a few hundr buck and drive
the patient home
after render servic the provid will bill the patient insur compani medicar or
medicaid for the unnecessari procedur beyond the usual and customari cost past
investig evid up to 5000 percent abov averag market price the claim will
like includ fee for surgic suppli and medic equip that were never us or
distribut some insur reimburs patient directli for outofnetwork claim therebi
requir the patient to pai the facil howev becaus the patient target in renta
patient scam ar often indig and believ thei deserv the monei for endur the
unnecessari procedur it is common for them to deposit or cash the check it is a cycl
wherebi the victim ar not onli us to perpetr the fraud but in the end becom
fraudster themselv
insur compani have difficulti determin when rentapati scheme ar be
commit becaus their claim system can onli compar code and cannot determin the
usual and customari cost for a particular procedur to make matter wors some state
have prompt pai law requir claim to be paid within a period of time such as 45dai
rapid claim turnov inevit lead to poor oversight regard fraudrel claim
health care fraud financi transact
11236 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc us gao report health care fraud scheme to defraud medicar medicaid and privat health care
insur juli 2000
