2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Managed Care/Types of Managed Care Frauds


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Types of Managed Care Frauds 
• Inadequate treatment of patients. 
• Referring patients automatically to providers outside the network (perhaps in exchange 
for kickbacks from outside providers). 
• Establishment of inconvenient appointment hours, service locations, etc. to suppress the 
number of patients. 
• Inflating reports of patient traffic and treatment costs to induce payers to increase future 
per patient capitation fees. 
• False claims for services not covered by fixed capitation payments. 
• Falsification of quality of care and/or treatment-outcome data. 
• Providers misrepresenting their credentials or qualifications for admission to a given 
payer’s network of managed care providers. 
• Out-of-network overbilling for substandard services. 
• Employees’ creating claim checks during periods when the plan no longer is doing 
business with the HMO, but treatment of members continues due to existing problems. 
• Providing kickbacks to employees of managed care organizations for putting patients in 
their panel. 
 
Managed care systems also create the opportunity for fraud by the insureds. Some of the 
examples of fraud that may be found in the managed care environment include  
the following: 
• Patients (members) loaning or selling use of card to nonmembers. 
• Enrolling noneligible persons as members for obtaining treatment. 
• Failing to disenroll ex-spouse of family members. 
• Out-of-network falsified emergency trea tment in collusion with providers. 
 



:


type of manag care fraud
inadequ treatment of patient
refer patient automat to provid outsid the network perhap in exchang
for kickback from outsid provid
establish of inconveni appoint hour servic locat etc to suppress the
number of patient
inflat report of patient traffic and treatment cost to induc payer to increas futur
per patient capit fee
fals claim for servic not cover by fix capit payment
falsif of qualiti of care andor treatmentoutcom data
provid misrepres their credenti or qualif for admiss to a given
payer network of manag care provid
outofnetwork overbil for substandard servic
employe creat claim check dure period when the plan no longer is do
busi with the hmo but treatment of member continu due to exist problem
provid kickback to employe of manag care organ for put patient in
their panel
manag care system also creat the opportun for fraud by the insur some of the
exampl of fraud that mai be found in the manag care environ includ
the follow
patient member loan or sell us of card to nonmemb
enrol nonelig person as member for obtain treatment
fail to disenrol exspous of famili member
outofnetwork falsifi emerg trea tment in collus with provid
