2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Electronic Claims Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Electronic Claims Fraud 
Auditing electronic claims may use the same techniques as auditing any other type of health 
care if the original source documents are used. The difference may be that the audit may use 
the information electronically transmitted rather than the original information. If reliance 
could be placed on the information being submitted, then there wouldn’t be any difference. 
However, history has proved that electronic claims can be a fertile source for fraud. 
 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) is the exchange of electronic data between computers in 
which there is no human interaction. This technology has advanced companies’ ability to 
conduct business by light-years, but it has also provided would-be fraudsters an increased 
opportunity to commit white-collar crimes. 
 
EDI’s origins arise in the 1960s, when many industry groups began to develop EDI 
standards in areas such as purchasing, transportation, and financial transactions. The next 
major step forward came when the Transportation Data Coordinating Committee and the 
National Association of Credit Management’s Credit Research Foundation developed the 
first standards of electronic data interchange. At this time, they have developed over 300 
different standards for individual industries concerning the transmission of EDI. These 
standards are published by the Data Interchange Standards Association.  
 
Although these standards have been adopted and used worldwide by a multitude of different 
industries, the health care industry has been notoriously slow in adopting the new 
technology. Only now have a handful of large health care providers such as Blue Cross Blue 
Shield announced their endorsements of the health care industry conducting business 
electronically. The reasoning behind the reluctance to convert is that the health care system 
is so complicated that a switch in operation procedure of this magnitude would cause 
considerable headache in the early phases. 
 
EDI can be used internally within a business as a way of communication and data transfer 
and it can also be used for the same purposes between different businesses. In the case of 
the health care industry, EDI enables the different companies to send claims, invoices, and 
other vital data that once was shipped in a paper format via airmail. The fact that EDI allows 
for an immediate exchange of data makes the process of submitting and approving health 
care claims much more efficient for the health care industry.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1249 
The health care transactions that will be affected by the emerging of EDI technologies 
include: 
• Claims payment  
• Enrollments 
• Claims submission 
• Eligibility 
• Claim status 
• Crossover COB 
• Health care service review 
• Patient information record 
• Managed care encounter 
• Capitated payment 
• Interactive claim 
• HMO reporting 
• Provider information 
 
In the current health care system, there are over 1,500 insurance companies that process 
over four billion medical claims every year. Because the health care system uses over 450 
different types of forms, it is estimated that in the past, the health care industry spent as 
much as $100 billion per year to process its paperwork. Thus, EDI has the potential to save 
the health care industry from $8 billion to $20 billion every year. It is very simply a more 
efficient way for the health care industry to do business. However, fraud examiners fear that 
a more efficient system also paves the way for more efficient ways to defraud the health  
care industry. 
 
Solid controls must be established to deal with the health care industry’s conversion to EDI 
or the savings that the more efficient system will produce may be gobbled up by bigger fraud 
losses. The electronic conversion of information completely removes paper-based controls. 
 
EDI eliminates the abilities that fraud examiners have to detect fraud in the health care 
industry in three ways: 
• The automation of claims has erased claims professionals’ ability to detect suspicious-
 looking claims. Because they are used to handling the paperwork of claims, EDI 
hampers the claims professional from getting a good picture of the overall nature of an 
account, instead reducing each transaction to individual claims. 
• Because of the impersonal nature of electronic transactions, EDI raises the temptation 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1250                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of would-be fraudsters to commit white-collar crime. 
• EDI leaves no paper trail, making the process of fraud detection difficult for the  
fraud examiner. 
 
The reasons the health care industry is concerned about EDI’s potential to stimulate 
fraudulent activity include: 
• The lack of tools to detect EDI fraud. 
• The variation of health care services precipitates the potential from a plethora of 
dissimilar frauds. 
• The efficiency of EDI allows for more vendors and thus more claims to account for. 
• The swiftness in which transactions take place allow less time to uncover fraud. 
 
In the past, the health care industry has developed sophisticated methods of detecting fraud 
within the paper-based system. Now that the conversion to EDI is taking place, the health 
care industry must find a way to convert those methods to uncovering fraud in the electronic 
format. These methods will only be as sophisticated as the health care industry chooses to 
make them; the less concern that the industry shows for creating fraud indicators, the more 
opportunity they will be giving fraudsters to “beat the system.”   
 
Fraud examiners should not fear that the conversion to EDI will eliminate any fraud-related 
job opportunities. In fact, that conversion will actually open up many fraud examination 
jobs, as the safeguards and red flag system against fraud has not been effectively established 
at this time. Therefore, fraud examiners need to be aware that their jobs include not only 
investigating fraud, but also to creating systems that will effectively deter fraud. 
 
Many new and complicated legal issues are raised as a result of the health care industry’s 
conversion to EDI. Some of the difficult questions that have been pressed include: 
• How does the insurance company prove that all electronic claims are authentic? 
• Who is responsible for errors in electronic health care claims? 
• How does the fraud examiner prove that the contents of an electronic health care claim 
are false? 
• How does the health care industry ensure that all electronic transmissions are received 
exactly as they are sent? 
• What terms and conditions govern electronic claims? 
• How will fraud examiners determine the actual origin of any electronic submission? 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1251 
Because automated claims are quite easily altered, the health care industry must ensure that 
claims are authentic. Fraud examiners must document that claims have been received in the 
same condition in which they were processed if they are to be admissible as evidence.  
 
Some examples of ways to ensure claims’ authenticity include: 
• Data encryption  
• Digital signatures  
• Message authentication codes  
• Prior claims’ history checkups 
• A variety of field checks 
 



:


electron claim fraud
audit electron claim mai us the same techniqu as audit ani other type of health
care if the origin sourc document ar us the differ mai be that the audit mai us
the inform electron transmit rather than the origin inform if relianc
could be place on the inform be submit then there wouldnt be ani differ
howev histori ha prove that electron claim can be a fertil sourc for fraud
electron data interchang edi is the exchang of electron data between comput in
which there is no human interact thi technolog ha advanc compani abil to
conduct busi by lightyear but it ha also provid wouldb fraudster an increas
opportun to commit whitecollar crime
edi origin aris in the 1960 when mani industri group began to develop edi
standard in area such as purchas transport and financi transact the next
major step forward came when the transport data coordin committe and the
nation associ of credit manag credit research foundat develop the
first standard of electron data interchang at thi time thei have develop over 300
differ standard for individu industri concern the transmiss of edi these
standard ar publish by the data interchang standard associ
although these standard have been adopt and us worldwid by a multitud of differ
industri the health care industri ha been notori slow in adopt the new
technolog onli now have a hand of larg health care provid such as blue cross blue
shield announc their endors of the health care industri conduct busi
electron the reason behind the reluct to convert is that the health care system
is so complic that a switch in oper procedur of thi magnitud would caus
consider headach in the earli phase
edi can be us intern within a busi as a wai of commun and data transfer
and it can also be us for the same purpos between differ busi in the case of
the health care industri edi enabl the differ compani to send claim invoic and
other vital data that onc wa ship in a paper format via airmail the fact that edi allow
for an immedi exchang of data make the process of submit and approv health
care claim much more effici for the health care industri
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11249
the health care transact that will be affect by the emerg of edi technolog
includ
claim payment
enrol
claim submiss
elig
claim statu
crossov cob
health care servic review
patient inform record
manag care encount
capit payment
interact claim
hmo report
provid inform
in the current health care system there ar over 1500 insur compani that process
over four billion medic claim everi year becaus the health care system us over 450
differ type of form it is estim that in the past the health care industri spent as
much as 100 billion per year to process it paperwork thu edi ha the potenti to save
the health care industri from 8 billion to 20 billion everi year it is veri simpli a more
effici wai for the health care industri to do busi howev fraud examin fear that
a more effici system also pave the wai for more effici wai to defraud the health
care industri
solid control must be establish to deal with the health care industri convers to edi
or the save that the more effici system will produc mai be gobbl up by bigger fraud
loss the electron convers of inform complet remov paperbas control
edi elimin the abil that fraud examin have to detect fraud in the health care
industri in three wai
the autom of claim ha eras claim profession abil to detect suspici
look claim becaus thei ar us to handl the paperwork of claim edi
hamper the claim profession from get a good pictur of the overal natur of an
account instead reduc each transact to individu claim
becaus of the imperson natur of electron transact edi rais the temptat
health care fraud financi transact
11250 2011 fraud examin manual
of wouldb fraudster to commit whitecollar crime
edi leav no paper trail make the process of fraud detect difficult for the
fraud examin
the reason the health care industri is concern about edi potenti to stimul
fraudul activ includ
the lack of tool to detect edi fraud
the variat of health care servic precipit the potenti from a plethora of
dissimilar fraud
the effici of edi allow for more vendor and thu more claim to account for
the swift in which transact take place allow less time to uncov fraud
in the past the health care industri ha develop sophist method of detect fraud
within the paperbas system now that the convers to edi is take place the health
care industri must find a wai to convert those method to uncov fraud in the electron
format these method will onli be as sophist as the health care industri choos to
make them the less concern that the industri show for creat fraud indic the more
opportun thei will be give fraudster to beat the system
fraud examin should not fear that the convers to edi will elimin ani fraudrel
job opportun in fact that convers will actual open up mani fraud examin
job as the safeguard and red flag system against fraud ha not been effect establish
at thi time therefor fraud examin need to be awar that their job includ not onli
investig fraud but also to creat system that will effect deter fraud
mani new and complic legal issu ar rais as a result of the health care industri
convers to edi some of the difficult question that have been press includ
how doe the insur compani prove that all electron claim ar authent
who is respons for error in electron health care claim
how doe the fraud examin prove that the content of an electron health care claim
ar fals
how doe the health care industri ensur that all electron transmiss ar receiv
exactli as thei ar sent
what term and condit govern electron claim
how will fraud examin determin the actual origin of ani electron submiss
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11251
becaus autom claim ar quit easili alter the health care industri must ensur that
claim ar authent fraud examin must document that claim have been receiv in the
same condit in which thei were process if thei ar to be admiss as evid
some exampl of wai to ensur claim authent includ
data encrypt
digit signatur
messag authent code
prior claim histori checkup
a varieti of field check
