2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Mortgage Broker Originated Loans


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Mortgage Broker Originated Loans 
The increasing number of mortgage broker originated loans has also played a part in the 
rising number of subprime fraud cases. Historically, mortgage loans were originated by the 
loan officer at the bank. Mortgage lenders, however, started relying on third-party originators 
(TPOs) to broker their loan products. Brokers could be paid a commission rather than a 
salary, an option that worked well for minimally capitalized mortgage lenders.  
As a result, the industry has seen the evolution of mortgage brokers.  
 
As markets for mortgages became more competitive, banks with their own retail loan 
officers also started employing these third-party wholesale originators. Today, mortgage 
brokers are the largest distributors of mortgage products for mortgage lenders and banks. It 
is estimated that two-thirds of all originations are from wholesale TPO mortgage brokers 
rather than retail loan officers. 
 
Mortgage broker-originated loans are vulnerable to fraud primarily because, until recently, 
there were no national standards for the licensing and oversight of mortgage brokers. 
However, on July 30, 2008, President Bush signed into law the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act), which is part of the Housing and 
Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Designed to provide uniform licensing standards 
nationwide, the SAFE Act required all states to have in place a system of licensure meeting 
minimum standards for mortgage loan originators (i.e., anyone who takes a residential 
mortgage loan application or who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan 
application for compensation or gain) beginning July 31, 2009.  
 



:


mortgag broker origin loan
the increas number of mortgag broker origin loan ha also plai a part in the
rise number of subprim fraud case histor mortgag loan were origin by the
loan offic at the bank mortgag lender howev start reli on thirdparti origin
tpo to broker their loan product broker could be paid a commiss rather than a
salari an option that work well for minim capit mortgag lender
as a result the industri ha seen the evolut of mortgag broker
as market for mortgag becam more competit bank with their own retail loan
offic also start emploi these thirdparti wholesal origin todai mortgag
broker ar the largest distributor of mortgag product for mortgag lender and bank it
is estim that twothird of all origin ar from wholesal tpo mortgag broker
rather than retail loan offic
mortgag brokerorigin loan ar vulner to fraud primarili becaus until recent
there were no nation standard for the licens and oversight of mortgag broker
howev on juli 30 2008 presid bush sign into law the secur and fair enforc
for mortgag licens act of 2008 safe act which is part of the hous and
econom recoveri act of 2008 design to provid uniform licens standard
nationwid the safe act requir all state to have in place a system of licensur meet
minimum standard for mortgag loan origin ie anyon who take a residenti
mortgag loan applic or who offer or negoti term of a residenti mortgag loan
applic for compens or gain begin juli 31 2009
