2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Property Flipping


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Property Flipping 
Property flipping has been around for a long time. It is well known in the real estate industry 
as a way to make a profit by buying low and selling high, and it is not necessarily illegal. 
Flipping is perfectly fine when all representations of the property condition and value are 
true and accurate. However, flipping can also be a fraud for profit scheme that may lead to 
substantial losses and other devastating consequences.  
 
Property flipping is the process by which an investor purchases a home and then resells it at a 
higher price shortly thereafter. For example, an investor buys a house in need of work for 
$250,000 in July, renovates the kitchen and the bathrooms and landscapes the yard at a cost 
of $50,000, and then resells the house two months later (the time it takes to make the 
renovations) for a price that is reflective of the market for a house in its updated condition. 
This is a legitimate business transaction, and there are numerous individuals and groups in 
the real estate market who make an honest living flipping properties.  
 
However, property flipping becomes illegal and fraudulent when a home is purchased and 
resold within a short period of time at an artificially inflated value. The key in determining 
whether a flip is illegal is to watch for a significant increase in value over a short period of 
time that cannot be justified. A property that sells twice in the same day at an increase of 
$100,000 is hard to justify. 
 
An illegal property flip is usually dependent on an appraisal report that has artificially inflated 
the value of the property. The borrower may review the appraisal without inspecting the 
property, completely unaware of the market values in that property’s neighborhood. The 
borrower may also be a straw borrower or an accomplice. 
 



:


properti flip
properti flip ha been around for a long time it is well known in the real estat industri
as a wai to make a profit by bui low and sell high and it is not necessarili illeg
flip is perfectli fine when all represent of the properti condit and valu ar
true and accur howev flip can also be a fraud for profit scheme that mai lead to
substanti loss and other devast consequ
properti flip is the process by which an investor purchas a home and then resel it at a
higher price shortli thereaft for exampl an investor bui a hous in need of work for
250000 in juli renov the kitchen and the bathroom and landscap the yard at a cost
of 50000 and then resel the hous two month later the time it take to make the
renov for a price that is reflect of the market for a hous in it updat condit
thi is a legitim busi transact and there ar numer individu and group in
the real estat market who make an honest live flip properti
howev properti flip becom illeg and fraudul when a home is purchas and
resold within a short period of time at an artifici inflat valu the kei in determin
whether a flip is illeg is to watch for a signific increas in valu over a short period of
time that cannot be justifi a properti that sell twice in the same dai at an increas of
100000 is hard to justifi
an illeg properti flip is usual depend on an apprais report that ha artifici inflat
the valu of the properti the borrow mai review the apprais without inspect the
properti complet unawar of the market valu in that properti neighborhood the
borrow mai also be a straw borrow or an accomplic
