2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes/Instantaneous Transfer


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Instantaneous Transfer 
Wire transfer services electronically move funds worldwide from a financial institution to a 
beneficiary account at any banking point according to a customer’s instructions. (A banking 
point is any institution or business capable of receiving electronic transactions such as banks, 
savings and loans, credit unions, brokerage firms, and insurance companies.) On any day, $2 
trillion to $3 trillion moves among financial institutions. The transactions are primarily for 
completing interbank purchases and sales of federal funds; purchasing, selling, and financing 
securities transactions; disbursing loan proceeds or repaying loans; and conducting real estate 
business.  
 
Although these technologies enhance operations and increase the efficiency of the financial 
institutions, they also provide a tremendous opportunity for criminals who learn to 
manipulate the electronic environment for their personal gain. Wire transfer fraud is a 
particularly dangerous risk to a business’s solvency—one major wire fraud can destroy any 
                                                          
1 The editors wish to thank James Incaprera, CFSSP, CP P, and Joyce C. Lambert, Ph.D., CIA, CPA, for their 
assistance in preparing this section. Mr. Incaprera is the Louisiana investigations manager for Bank One in New 
Orleans, LA, and Dr. Lambert is a professor of accounting at the University of New Orleans. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.935 
firm. According to the Multi-State Sharing and Analysis Center, single losses average 
$100,000 to $200,000.  
 



:


instantan transfer
wire transfer servic electron move fund worldwid from a financi institut to a
beneficiari account at ani bank point accord to a custom instruct a bank
point is ani institut or busi capabl of receiv electron transact such as bank
save and loan credit union brokerag firm and insur compani on ani dai 2
trillion to 3 trillion move among financi institut the transact ar primarili for
complet interbank purchas and sale of feder fund purchas sell and financ
secur transact disburs loan proce or repai loan and conduct real estat
busi
although these technolog enhanc oper and increas the effici of the financi
institut thei also provid a tremend opportun for crimin who learn to
manipul the electron environ for their person gain wire transfer fraud is a
particularli danger risk to a businesss solvencyon major wire fraud can destroi ani
1 the editor wish to thank jame incaprera cfssp cp p and joyc c lambert phd cia cpa for their
assist in prepar thi section mr incaprera is the louisiana investig manag for bank on in new
orlean la and dr lambert is a professor of account at the univers of new orlean
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1935
firm accord to the multist share and analysi center singl loss averag
100000 to 200000
