2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Advanced Fee Fraud/Brokered Loans


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Brokered Loans 
A variation of the advanced fee scheme is the brokered loan. Loan brokering applies to either 
packages of individual residential (consumer) loans or single commercial loans. A variation 
of a brokered loan is the loan participation, where the purchaser participates in the loan but 
does not purchase the entire loan. The fraud schemes associated with brokered or 
participated loans generally involve selling phony loans (packages) or selling participations in 
loans that have not been properly underwritten. Generally, a large fee is charged for these 
brokered loans. 
 
With residential loan packages, the broker sells the package, takes the money and disappears. 
Brokered loans are generally not sold with any recourse to the broker. Therefore, the 
purchaser must look to the borrower and the underlying collateral for debt satisfaction. With 
loan participations, the lead bank generally performs the underwriting. However, this does 
not relieve the participating bank from its obligation to perform its own due diligence. If the 
participating bank does not independently examine the documentation and perform its own 
due diligence, then fraud schemes on the part of the selling institution are possible. 
 
 



:


broker loan
a variat of the advanc fee scheme is the broker loan loan broker appli to either
packag of individu residenti consum loan or singl commerci loan a variat
of a broker loan is the loan particip where the purchas particip in the loan but
doe not purchas the entir loan the fraud scheme associ with broker or
particip loan gener involv sell phoni loan packag or sell particip in
loan that have not been properli underwritten gener a larg fee is charg for these
broker loan
with residenti loan packag the broker sell the packag take the monei and disappear
broker loan ar gener not sold with ani recours to the broker therefor the
purchas must look to the borrow and the underli collater for debt satisfact with
loan particip the lead bank gener perform the underwrit howev thi doe
not reliev the particip bank from it oblig to perform it own due dilig if the
particip bank doe not independ examin the document and perform it own
due dilig then fraud scheme on the part of the sell institut ar possibl
