2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Applicable Federal Statutes/Red Flag Rules


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Red Flag Rules 
In 2007, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued final rules and guidelines (Red Flag 
Rules) implementing sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act 
(FACTA). The Red Flag Rules require financial institutions and certain creditors to develop 
and implement a formal written program to identify, detect, and respond to red flags of 
possible identity theft. 
 
Although the Red Flag Rules apply primarily to financial institutions, they also apply to any 
creditor with covered accounts. The definition of creditor  includes any entity that “regularly 
extends, renews, or continues credit” or that “regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, 
or continuation of credit,” including banking in stitutions, mortgage lenders, retailers, utility 
companies, car dealers, and debt collectors. A covered account  is an account primarily used for 
personal, family, or household purposes and that involves multiple payments or transactions, 
including credit card accounts, mortgage loans, car loans, cell phone accounts, utility 
accounts, and savings accounts. Therefore, even if a business is not a financial services 
entity, management should determine whether the entity is a creditor under the Red Flag 
Rules.  
 
To comply with the Red Flag Rules, financial institutions and creditors with covered 
accounts must implement written identity theft prevention programs that are tailored to each 
entity’s size, complexity, and nature. These organizations must also adopt “reasonable 
policies and procedures” that:  
• Identify relevant red flags for covered accounts and incorporate them into the 
prevention program. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.948                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the prevention program. 
• Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity 
theft. 
• Ensure the prevention program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to 
customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from 
identity theft. 
 
The Red Flag Rules also provides 26 examples of possible red flags that financial institutions 
and creditors should consider when implementing their programs. The examples are listed 
below:   
1. A fraud alert  
2. Notice of a credit freeze  
3. Notice of an address discrepancy. 
4. Unusual credit activity 
5. Identification documents appear altered or forged. 
6. ID photograph and customer appearance appear inconsistent 
7. Information presented by customer and information on ID are inconsistent 
8. Information on ID is inconsistent with information on file 
9. Application appears forged or altered 
10. Personal information on ID is inconsistent with external information sources  
11. Lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth. 
12. Personal identifying information is associated with known fraud activity. 
13. Suspicious addresses supplied 
14. Provided Social Security number matches number submitted by another person  
15. Address or phone number matches that supplied by other customers 
16. In response to notice that application is incomplete, customer is unable to supply 
identifying information  
17. Personal information inconsistent with information already on file  
18. Customer unable to answer challenge questions 
19. Shortly after change of address, creditor receives request for the addition of authorized 
account users 
20. Most of available credit used for cash advances, jewelry, or electronics, or customer fails 
to make first payment 
21. Inconsistent activity patterns 
22. Previously inactive accounts suddenly becoming active 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.949 
23. Mail sent to customer repeatedly returned as undeliverable even though transactions 
continue on active account 
24. Notice that customer is not receiving paper account statements 
25. Notice of unauthorized charges or transactions on customer's account 
26. Notice of opening a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft 
  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1001 



:


red flag rule
in 2007 the feder trade commiss ftc issu final rule and guidelin red flag
rule implement section 114 and 315 of the fair and accur credit transact act
facta the red flag rule requir financi institut and certain creditor to develop
and implement a formal written program to identifi detect and respond to red flag of
possibl ident theft
although the red flag rule appli primarili to financi institut thei also appli to ani
creditor with cover account the definit of creditor includ ani entiti that regularli
extend renew or continu credit or that regularli arrang for the extens renew
or continu of credit includ bank in stitut mortgag lender retail util
compani car dealer and debt collector a cover account is an account primarili us for
person famili or household purpos and that involv multipl payment or transact
includ credit card account mortgag loan car loan cell phone account util
account and save account therefor even if a busi is not a financi servic
entiti manag should determin whether the entiti is a creditor under the red flag
rule
to compli with the red flag rule financi institut and creditor with cover
account must implement written ident theft prevent program that ar tailor to each
entiti size complex and natur these organ must also adopt reason
polici and procedur that
identifi relev red flag for cover account and incorpor them into the
prevent program
financi institut fraud financi transact
1948 2011 fraud examin manual
detect red flag that have been incorpor into the prevent program
respond appropri to ani red flag that ar detect to prevent and mitig ident
theft
ensur the prevent program is updat period to reflect chang in risk to
custom or to the safeti and sound of the financi institut or creditor from
ident theft
the red flag rule also provid 26 exampl of possibl red flag that financi institut
and creditor should consid when implement their program the exampl ar list
below
1 a fraud alert
2 notic of a credit freez
3 notic of an address discrep
4 unusu credit activ
5 identif document appear alter or forg
6 id photograph and custom appear appear inconsist
7 inform present by custom and inform on id ar inconsist
8 inform on id is inconsist with inform on file
9 applic appear forg or alter
10 person inform on id is inconsist with extern inform sourc
11 lack of correl between social secur number rang and date of birth
12 person identifi inform is associ with known fraud activ
13 suspici address suppli
14 provid social secur number match number submit by anoth person
15 address or phone number match that suppli by other custom
16 in respons to notic that applic is incomplet custom is unabl to suppli
identifi inform
17 person inform inconsist with inform alreadi on file
18 custom unabl to answer challeng question
19 shortli after chang of address creditor receiv request for the addit of author
account user
20 most of avail credit us for cash advanc jewelri or electron or custom fail
to make first payment
21 inconsist activ pattern
22 previous inact account suddenli becom activ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1949
23 mail sent to custom repeatedli return as undeliver even though transact
continu on activ account
24 notic that custom is not receiv paper account statement
25 notic of unauthor charg or transact on custom account
26 notic of open a fraudul account for a person engag in ident theft
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11001
