2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Fraud Examination and Forensic Accounting


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Fraud Examination and Forensic Accounting 
Forensic accounting and fraud examination are different but related. Forensic accounting 
work is done by accountants in anticipation of litigation and can include fraud, valuation, 
I-2     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
INTRODUCTION 
bankruptcy, and a host of other professional services. Fraud examinations can be conducted 
by either accountants or nonaccountants and refer only to anti-fraud matters.  
 
Forensic accounting is the use of professional accounting skills in matters involving potential 
or actual civil or criminal litigation. The word forensic  is defined by Black’s Law Dictionary  as 
“used in or suitable to courts of law or public debate.” Therefore, forensic accounting  is actually 
litigation support involving accounting.  
 
Accordingly, most fraud examinations involve forensic accounting but not all forensic 
accounting is fraud examination. For example, the valuation of a property in a minority 
shareholder derivative suit would be included under forensic accounting but may not 
necessarily involve fraud. 
 
Fraud examinations will generally fall under the category of forensic accounting because the 
majority of examinations, investigations, and reports regarding fraud are done with “an eye 
toward litigation.” In other words, fraud examiners are taught to conduct their examination 
with the assumption that the case may end in litigation. 
 
 



:


fraud examin and forens account
forens account and fraud examin ar differ but relat forens account
work is done by account in anticip of litig and can includ fraud valuat
i2 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct
bankruptci and a host of other profession servic fraud examin can be conduct
by either account or nonaccount and refer onli to antifraud matter
forens account is the us of profession account skill in matter involv potenti
or actual civil or crimin litig the word forens is defin by black law dictionari as
us in or suitabl to court of law or public debat therefor forens account is actual
litig support involv account
accordingli most fraud examin involv forens account but not all forens
account is fraud examin for exampl the valuat of a properti in a minor
sharehold deriv suit would be includ under forens account but mai not
necessarili involv fraud
fraud examin will gener fall under the categori of forens account becaus the
major of examin investig and report regard fraud ar done with an ey
toward litig in other word fraud examin ar taught to conduct their examin
with the assumpt that the case mai end in litig
