2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Diverting Business to Vendors


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Diverting Business to Vendors 
In some instances, an employee-fraudster receives a kickback simply for directing excess 
business to a vendor. There might be no overbilling involved in these cases; the vendor 
simply pays the kickbacks to ensure a steady stream of business from the purchasing 
company.  
 
If no overbilling is involved in a kickback scheme, one might wonder where the harm lies. 
Assuming the vendor simply wants to get the buyer’s business and does not increase his 
prices or bill for undelivered goods and services, how is the buyer harmed? The problem is 
that, having bought off an employee of the purchasing company, a vendor is no longer 
subject to the normal economic pressures of the marketplace. This vendor does not have to 
compete with other suppliers for the purchasing company’s business, and so has no 
incentive to provide a low price or quality merchandise. In these circumstances the 
purchasing company almost always ends up overpaying for goods or services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A travel agency provided free travel and entertainment to the purchasing agent of a retail 
company. In return, the purchasing agent agr eed to book all corporate trips through the 
travel agent. The victim company estimated that it paid $10,000 more for airfare over a 
two-year period by booking through the corrupt travel agency than if it had used a different 
company.  
 
Once a vendor knows it has an exclusive purchasing arrangement, its incentive is to raise 
prices to cover the cost of the kickback. Most bribery schemes end up as overbilling 
schemes even if they do not start that way. This is one reason why most business codes of 
ethics prohibit employees from accepting undisclosed gifts from vendors. In the long run, 
the employee’s company is sure to pay for his unethical conduct.   
 



:


divert busi to vendor
in some instanc an employeefraudst receiv a kickback simpli for direct excess
busi to a vendor there might be no overbil involv in these case the vendor
simpli pai the kickback to ensur a steadi stream of busi from the purchas
compani
if no overbil is involv in a kickback scheme on might wonder where the harm li
assum the vendor simpli want to get the buyer busi and doe not increas hi
price or bill for undeliv good and servic how is the buyer harm the problem is
that have bought off an employe of the purchas compani a vendor is no longer
subject to the normal econom pressur of the marketplac thi vendor doe not have to
compet with other supplier for the purchas compani busi and so ha no
incent to provid a low price or qualiti merchandis in these circumst the
purchas compani almost alwai end up overpai for good or servic
exampl
a travel agenc provid free travel and entertain to the purchas agent of a retail
compani in return the purchas agent agr eed to book all corpor trip through the
travel agent the victim compani estim that it paid 10000 more for airfar over a
twoyear period by book through the corrupt travel agenc than if it had us a differ
compani
onc a vendor know it ha an exclus purchas arrang it incent is to rais
price to cover the cost of the kickback most briberi scheme end up as overbil
scheme even if thei do not start that wai thi is on reason why most busi code of
ethic prohibit employe from accept undisclos gift from vendor in the long run
the employe compani is sure to pai for hi uneth conduct
