2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Overbilling Schemes/FRAUDSTERS LACKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


FRAUDSTERS LACKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
While the majority of kickback schemes involve persons with authority to approve 
purchases, this authority is not an absolute necessity. When an employee cannot approve 
fraudulent purchases himself, he can still orchestrate a kickback scheme if he can circumvent 
accounts payable controls. In some cases, all that is required is the filing of a false purchase 
requisition. If a trusted employee tells his superior that the company needs certain materials 
or services, this is sometimes sufficient to get a false invoice approved for payment. Such 
schemes are generally successful when the person with approval authority is inattentive or 
when he is forced to rely on his subordinate’s guidance in purchasing matters.  
 
Corrupt employees might also prepare false vouchers to make it appear that fraudulent 
invoices are legitimate. Where proper controls are in place, a completed voucher is required 
before accounts payable will pay an invoice. One key is for the fraudster to create a purchase 
order that corresponds to the vendor’s fraudulent invoice. The fraudster might forge the 
signature of an authorized party on the purchase order to show that the acquisition has been 
approved. Where the payables system is computerized, an employee with access to a 
restricted password can enter the system and authorize payments on fraudulent invoices.  
 
In less sophisticated schemes, a corrupt employee might simply take a fraudulent invoice 
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepared invoices before they are input into the 
accounts payable system. A more detailed description of how false invoices are processed 
can be found in the Billing Schemes section.  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.706                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Kickback schemes can be very difficult to detect. In a sense, the victim company is being 
attacked from two directions. Externally, a corrupt vendor submits false invoices that induce 
the victim organization to unknowingly pay for goods or services that it does not receive. 
Internally, one or more of the victim company’s employees waits to corroborate the false 
information provided by the vendor.  
 



:


fraudster lack approv author
while the major of kickback scheme involv person with author to approv
purchas thi author is not an absolut necess when an employe cannot approv
fraudul purchas himself he can still orchestr a kickback scheme if he can circumv
account payabl control in some case all that is requir is the file of a fals purchas
requisit if a trust employe tell hi superior that the compani need certain materi
or servic thi is sometim suffici to get a fals invoic approv for payment such
scheme ar gener success when the person with approv author is inattent or
when he is forc to reli on hi subordin guidanc in purchas matter
corrupt employe might also prepar fals voucher to make it appear that fraudul
invoic ar legitim where proper control ar in place a complet voucher is requir
befor account payabl will pai an invoic on kei is for the fraudster to creat a purchas
order that correspond to the vendor fraudul invoic the fraudster might forg the
signatur of an author parti on the purchas order to show that the acquisit ha been
approv where the payabl system is computer an employe with access to a
restrict password can enter the system and author payment on fraudul invoic
in less sophist scheme a corrupt employe might simpli take a fraudul invoic
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepar invoic befor thei ar input into the
account payabl system a more detail descript of how fals invoic ar process
can be found in the bill scheme section
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1706 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback scheme can be veri difficult to detect in a sens the victim compani is be
attack from two direct extern a corrupt vendor submit fals invoic that induc
the victim organ to unknowingli pai for good or servic that it doe not receiv
intern on or more of the victim compani employe wait to corrobor the fals
inform provid by the vendor
