2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Bid-Rigging Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Bid-Rigging Schemes 
As we have said, when one person pays a bribe to another, he does so to gain the benefit of 
the recipient’s influence. The competitive bidding process, in which several suppliers or 
contractors are vying for contracts in what can be a very cutthroat environment, is tailor-made 
for bribery. Any advantage one vendor can gain over his competitors in this arena is 
extremely valuable. The benefit of “inside influence” can ensure that a vendor will win a 
sought-after contract. Many vendors are willing to pay for this influence.  
 
In the competitive bidding process, all bidders are legally supposed to be placed on the same 
plane of equality, bidding on the same terms and conditions. Each bidder competes for a 
contract based on the specifications set forth by the purchasing company. Vendors submit 
confidential bids stating the price at which they will complete a project in accordance with 
the purchaser’s specifications. 
 
The way competitive bidding is rigged depends largely upon the level of influence of the 
corrupt employee. The more power a person has over the bidding process, the more likely 
the person can influence the selection of a supplier. Therefore, employees involved in bid-
 rigging schemes, like those in kickback schemes, tend to have a good measure of influence 
or access to the competitive bidding process. Potential targets for accepting bribes include 
buyers, contracting officials, engineers and technical representatives, quality or product 
assurance representatives, subcontractor liaison employees, or anyone else with authority 
over the awarding of contracts. 
 
Bid-rigging schemes can be categorized based on the stage of bidding at which the fraudster 
exerts his influence. Bid-rigging schemes usually occur in the presolicitation phase, the 
solicitation phase, or the submission phase of the bidding process. (See “Bid-Rigging” 
flowchart.) 
 



:


bidrig scheme
as we have said when on person pai a bribe to anoth he doe so to gain the benefit of
the recipi influenc the competit bid process in which sever supplier or
contractor ar vy for contract in what can be a veri cutthroat environ is tailormad
for briberi ani advantag on vendor can gain over hi competitor in thi arena is
extrem valuabl the benefit of insid influenc can ensur that a vendor will win a
soughtaft contract mani vendor ar will to pai for thi influenc
in the competit bid process all bidder ar legal suppos to be place on the same
plane of equal bid on the same term and condit each bidder compet for a
contract base on the specif set forth by the purchas compani vendor submit
confidenti bid state the price at which thei will complet a project in accord with
the purchas specif
the wai competit bid is rig depend larg upon the level of influenc of the
corrupt employe the more power a person ha over the bid process the more like
the person can influenc the select of a supplier therefor employe involv in bid
rig scheme like those in kickback scheme tend to have a good measur of influenc
or access to the competit bid process potenti target for accept bribe includ
buyer contract offici engin and technic repres qualiti or product
assur repres subcontractor liaison employe or anyon els with author
over the award of contract
bidrig scheme can be categor base on the stage of bid at which the fraudster
exert hi influenc bidrig scheme usual occur in the presolicit phase the
solicit phase or the submiss phase of the bid process see bidrig
flowchart
