2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/The Corrupt Recipient


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


The Corrupt Recipient 
A person taking payoffs or embezzling funds often exhibits the following characteristics: 
• The Big Spender — This is the most common way to detect corrupt recipients. Some 
recipients spend their money less conspicuously by paying off debts or paying down 
mortgages.  
• The Gift Taker — An official or executive who regularly accepts inappropriate gifts is often 
one susceptible to larger payments. 
• The “Odd Couple” — Corrupt payers and recipients often  appear to have very friendly 
social relationships. Frequent outside contacts, particularly between parties who do not 
appear to have much in common, might be a sign of deeper and more troublesome ties 
between the parties. 
• The Rule Breaker — This is often the most significant characteristic. A person taking 
payoffs will often take action on his own, or direct a subordinate to bend, break, or 
ignore standard operating procedures or rules to benefit the payer. Particular attention 
should be directed toward those who insert themselves into areas in which they are 
normally not involved or attempt to assert authority or make decisions for which they 
are not responsible. 
• The Complainer — A corrupt recipient often makes excuses for deficiencies in the payer’s 
services, such as poor quality, late deliveries, or high prices. Look for higher prices, 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.717 
“extra” payments, or commissions approved by the suspect, because these might be the 
source of kickback fraud. 
• Genuine Need — Greed, rather than need, seems to be the motivating factor in most cases. 
Occasionally, however, legitimate pressures, such as illness of family members or drug 
addiction, can induce participation in an illegal scheme. 
 



:


the corrupt recipi
a person take payoff or embezzl fund often exhibit the follow characterist
the big spender thi is the most common wai to detect corrupt recipi some
recipi spend their monei less conspicu by pai off debt or pai down
mortgag
the gift taker an offici or execut who regularli accept inappropri gift is often
on suscept to larger payment
the odd coupl corrupt payer and recipi often appear to have veri friendli
social relationship frequent outsid contact particularli between parti who do not
appear to have much in common might be a sign of deeper and more troublesom ti
between the parti
the rule breaker thi is often the most signific characterist a person take
payoff will often take action on hi own or direct a subordin to bend break or
ignor standard oper procedur or rule to benefit the payer particular attent
should be direct toward those who insert themselv into area in which thei ar
normal not involv or attempt to assert author or make decis for which thei
ar not respons
the complain a corrupt recipi often make excus for defici in the payer
servic such as poor qualiti late deliveri or high price look for higher price
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1717
extra payment or commiss approv by the suspect becaus these might be the
sourc of kickback fraud
genuin need greed rather than need seem to be the motiv factor in most case
occasion howev legitim pressur such as ill of famili member or drug
addict can induc particip in an illeg scheme
