2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Ghost Employee Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Ghost Employee Schemes 
Illicit funds can be generated by funneling phony salary payments to fictitious or former 
employees, or by making extra payments to presently salaried employees who then either 
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipient. This is in addition to ghost 
employee schemes used for embezzlement, described previously. To trace such payments, 
payroll and employee lists, personnel files, employment applications, tax withholding forms, 
and payroll checks should be obtained from the suspect payer company. 
 
Attempt to identify the ghost through the following steps: 
• Compare a list of all current and former employees from the personnel office to the 
payroll list. Note discrepancies. Determine whether any employees have failed to execute 
tax withholding forms, or have not elected to receive any health benefits or other 
optional withdrawals, such as enforced savings plans. The absence of such elections is 
often an indication that the employee does not exist. 
• A regular employee’s normal salary might also  be inflated, or, more commonly, travel 
and expense reimbursements might be padded to generate illicit funds. Look for unusual 
disbursements from the accounts in which such checks are deposited. 
 
Once a suspect paycheck has been identified, determine whether the check was cashed or 
deposited. Note the endorsement, the bank, and account where the check was deposited. 
Determine whether there are any second endorsements that might transfer the check to the 
ultimate recipient. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.727 



:


ghost employe scheme
illicit fund can be gener by funnel phoni salari payment to fictiti or former
employe or by make extra payment to present salari employe who then either
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipi thi is in addit to ghost
employe scheme us for embezzl describ previous to trace such payment
payrol and employe list personnel file employ applic tax withhold form
and payrol check should be obtain from the suspect payer compani
attempt to identifi the ghost through the follow step
compar a list of all current and former employe from the personnel offic to the
payrol list note discrep determin whether ani employe have fail to execut
tax withhold form or have not elect to receiv ani health benefit or other
option withdraw such as enforc save plan the absenc of such elect is
often an indic that the employe doe not exist
a regular employe normal salari might also be inflat or more commonli travel
and expens reimburs might be pad to gener illicit fund look for unusu
disburs from the account in which such check ar deposit
onc a suspect paycheck ha been identifi determin whether the check wa cash or
deposit note the endors the bank and account where the check wa deposit
determin whether there ar ani second endors that might transfer the check to the
ultim recipi
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1727
