2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Controlling Organizational Crime/Compliance


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Compliance 
Enforcement strategies include two main theories: compliance and deterrence.  
 
Compliance  hopes to achieve conformity to the law without having to detect, process, or 
penalize violators. Compliance systems provide economic incentives for voluntary 
compliance to the laws and use administrative efforts to control violations before they occur. 
For example, the SEC has a host of administrative mechanisms to encourage voluntary 
compliance with its rules. The IRS also uses such measures in addition to criminal penalties. 
Most environmental crimes also are controlled by these means. In a compliance system, an 
offense is called a “technical violation.”  
 
Compliance strategies have been criticized by some criminologists. These experts believe 
that compliance has little effect, as sanctions are imposed after the infraction occurs. Since 
economic penalties are common punishments for violators, these penalties amount to little 
more than the proverbial “slap on the wrist” in  the case of large, wealthy corporations.  
 



:


complianc
enforc strategi includ two main theori complianc and deterr
complianc hope to achiev conform to the law without have to detect process or
penal violat complianc system provid econom incent for voluntari
complianc to the law and us administr effort to control violat befor thei occur
for exampl the sec ha a host of administr mechan to encourag voluntari
complianc with it rule the ir also us such measur in addit to crimin penalti
most environment crime also ar control by these mean in a complianc system an
offens is call a technic violat
complianc strategi have been critic by some criminologist these expert believ
that complianc ha littl effect as sanction ar impos after the infract occur sinc
econom penalti ar common punish for violat these penalti amount to littl
more than the proverbi slap on the wrist in the case of larg wealthi corpor
