2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Sentencing Guidelines


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
Congress, in the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, mandated uniform sentencing 
guidelines. The Act also established the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), 
which began studying sentences for individuals  soon after the passage of the Act. It was 
widely held in Congress that there was a great disparity of penalties for similar crimes 
committed by individuals. After three years of study, the USSC announced Sentencing 
Guidelines for Individuals. In November of 1987, these Guidelines became effective in the 
94 Federal Courts of the United States. 
 
In 1988, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for corporate 
wrongdoing. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the USSC submitted 
its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. On November 1, 1991, the 
Guidelines went into effect. And in April 2010, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified 
sentencing guidelines for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. 
The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any Congressional 
modifications or rejection. 
 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Until January 2005, federal judges were required to use the Guidelines to determine whether 
a defendant had an “effective compliance program” in place to prevent the violations for 
which it was being charged. But in two key United States Supreme Court rulings, United 
States v. Booker and United States v. Fanfan, the Supreme Court ruled that the  
Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial requires that federal sentencing guidelines be advisory, 
rather than mandatory. Federal judges must still consider  the Guidelines when sentencing, but 
are not required  to sentence within the range set by the Guidelines. According to the 
guidelines, judges are still required to examine the adequacy of a company’s compliance and 
ethics program. Furthermore, judges may now mitigate punishment beyond the mandated 
level of mitigation given under the guidelines. 
 
The term organization  includes the following entities: 
• Corporations 
• Partnerships 
• Associations 
• Joint-stock companies 
• Unions 
• Trusts 
• Pension funds 
• Unincorporated organizations 
• Governments and political subdivisions thereof 
• Nonprofit organizations 
 
The introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial reduction 
of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. 
 
If an organization is found liable for an offense, the Guidelines provide for four types of 
remedies from which a judge may consider: fines,  restitution, remedial orders, and probation. 
 



:


corpor sentenc guidelin
congress in the comprehens crime control act of 1984 mandat uniform sentenc
guidelin the act also establish the unit state sentenc commiss ussc
which began studi sentenc for individu soon after the passag of the act it wa
wide held in congress that there wa a great dispar of penalti for similar crime
commit by individu after three year of studi the ussc announc sentenc
guidelin for individu in novemb of 1987 these guidelin becam effect in the
94 feder court of the unit state
in 1988 the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for corpor
wrongdo after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the ussc submit
it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress on novemb 1 1991 the
guidelin went into effect and in april 2010 the us sentenc commiss modifi
sentenc guidelin for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program
the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani congression
modif or reject
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4518 2011 fraud examin manual
until januari 2005 feder judg were requir to us the guidelin to determin whether
a defend had an effect complianc program in place to prevent the violat for
which it wa be charg but in two kei unit state suprem court rule unit
state v booker and unit state v fanfan the suprem court rule that the
sixth amend right to a juri trial requir that feder sentenc guidelin be advisori
rather than mandatori feder judg must still consid the guidelin when sentenc but
ar not requir to sentenc within the rang set by the guidelin accord to the
guidelin judg ar still requir to examin the adequaci of a compani complianc and
ethic program furthermor judg mai now mitig punish beyond the mandat
level of mitig given under the guidelin
the term organ includ the follow entiti
corpor
partnership
associ
jointstock compani
union
trust
pension fund
unincorpor organ
govern and polit subdivis thereof
nonprofit organ
the introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti reduct
of fine for organ that have effect complianc program
if an organ is found liabl for an offens the guidelin provid for four type of
remedi from which a judg mai consid fine restitut remedi order and probat
