2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Sentencing Guidelines/Calculating the Fine/FINE REDUCERS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


FINE REDUCERS 
The Guidelines provide for an organization’s fine to be increased if it acts “badly,” but also 
provides for the reduction of fines if the company is “good.” The Guidelines set forth two 
mitigating factors which will reduce an organization’s criminal fines:  
1. Self-reporting: An organization’s culpability score will be reduced if, within a reasonable 
amount of time after learning of the offense, the organization reports the offense to 
authorities and then cooperates in the investigation and accepts responsibility for its 
wrongdoing. There are three elements to the self-reporting mitigation credit: (1) reporting 
within a reasonable time, (2) cooperating in the investigation, and (3) accepting 
responsibility for the wrongdoing. The organization earns the most points (five) if it 
complies with all three elements. However, it can receive a smaller credit (two) even if it 
does not report the offense in a timely manner, as long as it cooperates in the investigation 
and admits its own wrongdoing. Even if the organization fails to cooperate, it can 
nevertheless receive some credit (one) for accepting responsibility. This usually means 
pleading guilty to the offense prior to trial.  
2. An effective program to prevent and detect violations of the law: The implementation of an 
effective compliance program is the only way an organization can mitigate potential fines 
before violations actually occur. It can knock up to three points (out of a possible ten) 
off of an organization’s culpability score. The elements of an effective compliance 
program under the Guidelines are discussed below.  
 
Every organization begins with a culpability score of 5 under the Guidelines. Each aggravating 
factor raises the culpability score, and each mitigating factor diminishes it. After all the factors 
have been considered, a final score is determined. Each score corresponds to a range of 
multipliers that determine how much the fine should be increased or decreased. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.521  



:


fine reduc
the guidelin provid for an organ fine to be increas if it act badli but also
provid for the reduct of fine if the compani is good the guidelin set forth two
mitig factor which will reduc an organ crimin fine
1 selfreport an organ culpabl score will be reduc if within a reason
amount of time after learn of the offens the organ report the offens to
author and then cooper in the investig and accept respons for it
wrongdo there ar three element to the selfreport mitig credit 1 report
within a reason time 2 cooper in the investig and 3 accept
respons for the wrongdo the organ earn the most point five if it
compli with all three element howev it can receiv a smaller credit two even if it
doe not report the offens in a time manner as long as it cooper in the investig
and admit it own wrongdo even if the organ fail to cooper it can
nevertheless receiv some credit on for accept respons thi usual mean
plead guilti to the offens prior to trial
2 an effect program to prevent and detect violat of the law the implement of an
effect complianc program is the onli wai an organ can mitig potenti fine
befor violat actual occur it can knock up to three point out of a possibl ten
off of an organ culpabl score the element of an effect complianc
program under the guidelin ar discuss below
everi organ begin with a culpabl score of 5 under the guidelin each aggrav
factor rais the culpabl score and each mitig factor diminish it after all the factor
have been consid a final score is determin each score correspond to a rang of
multipli that determin how much the fine should be increas or decreas
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4521
