2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Bid Solicitation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Bid Solicitation 
The following are examples of suspicious activity that might signal fraud in the bid 
solicitation phase:   
• The time for submitting bids is limited so that only those with advance information have 
adequate time to prepare bids or proposals. 
• One contractor receives confidential information that is not revealed to his competitors. 
• The conducting of a bidders’ conference, which permits improper communications 
between contractors, who then are in a position to rig bids. 
• The failure to ensure that a sufficient number of potential competitors are aware of the 
solicitation by: 
? Using obscure publications to publish bid solicitations. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.719 
? Publishing bid solicitations during holiday periods. 
• Bid solicitations that are vague as to the time, place, or other requirements for submitting 
acceptable bids. 
• Inadequate internal controls over the number and destination of bid packages sent to 
interested bidders. 
• Improper communication between purchasers and contractors at trade or professional 
meetings. 
• Improper social contact between purchasers and contractor representatives. 
• A purchasing agent who has a financial interest in the business of a contractor. 
• A purchaser who discusses possible employment with a contractor. 
• The purchaser assisting a contractor in the preparation of his bid. 
• A contractor being referred to a specific subcontractor, expert, or source of supply by an 
employee of the purchasing organization. 
• The failure to amend a solicitation to include necessary changes or clarifications in the 
bid, such as telling one contractor of changes that can be made after the bid. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts so that a late bid is accepted. 
• Any indications of collusion between bidders. 
• The falsification of a contractor’s qualifications, work history, facilities, equipment,  
or personnel. 
 



:


bid solicit
the follow ar exampl of suspici activ that might signal fraud in the bid
solicit phase
the time for submit bid is limit so that onli those with advanc inform have
adequ time to prepar bid or propos
on contractor receiv confidenti inform that is not reveal to hi competitor
the conduct of a bidder confer which permit improp commun
between contractor who then ar in a posit to rig bid
the failur to ensur that a suffici number of potenti competitor ar awar of the
solicit by
us obscur public to publish bid solicit
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1719
publish bid solicit dure holidai period
bid solicit that ar vagu as to the time place or other requir for submit
accept bid
inadequ intern control over the number and destin of bid packag sent to
interest bidder
improp commun between purchas and contractor at trade or profession
meet
improp social contact between purchas and contractor repres
a purchas agent who ha a financi interest in the busi of a contractor
a purchas who discuss possibl employ with a contractor
the purchas assist a contractor in the prepar of hi bid
a contractor be refer to a specif subcontractor expert or sourc of suppli by an
employe of the purchas organ
the failur to amend a solicit to includ necessari chang or clarif in the
bid such as tell on contractor of chang that can be made after the bid
the falsif of document or receipt so that a late bid is accept
ani indic of collus between bidder
the falsif of a contractor qualif work histori facil equip
or personnel
