2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Conflicts of Interest


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Conflicts of Interest 
Conflict of interest schemes generally constitute violations of the legal principle that a 
fiduciary, agent, or employee must act in good faith, with full disclosure, and in the best 
interest of the principal or employer. A conflict of interest occurs when an employee, 
manager, or executive has an undisclosed economic or personal interest in a transaction that 
adversely affects that person’s employer. As with other corruption frauds, conflict schemes 
involve the exertion of an employee’s influence to the detriment of his company. In bribery 
schemes, fraudsters are paid to exercise their influence on behalf of a third party. Conflict of 
interest cases instead involve self-dealing by an employee.  
 
If an employee engages in a transaction that involves a conflict of interest, then the 
employee might also have breached his fiduciary duty  to his employer. An agent (employee) 
owes a fiduciary duty (duty of loyalty) to the principal (employer). The agent must act solely in 
the best interest of the principal and cannot seek to advance personal interest to the 
detriment of the principal. 
 
Breach of fiduciary duty is a civil action that can be used to redress a wide variety of conduct 
that might also constitute fraud, commercial bribery, and conflicts of interest. The elements 
of proof of breach of fiduciary duty are considerably simpler than fraud, and do not require 
proof of wrongful intent. As in conflicts of interest, the wrongdoer must reimburse the 
principal for any losses and pay over profits earned, even if the principal suffered no loss. 
 
The vast majority of conflict of interest cases occur because the fraudster has an undisclosed 
economic interest in a transaction. But the fraudster’s hidden interest is not necessarily 
economic. In some scenarios an employee acts in a manner detrimental to his company in 
order to provide a benefit to a friend or relative, even though the fraudster receives no 
financial benefit from the transaction himself.  
 
In order to be classified as a conflict of interest scheme, the employee’s interest in the 
transaction must be undisclosed. The crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster takes 
advantage of his employer; the victim organization is unaware that its employee has divided 
loyalties. If an employer knows of the employee’s interest in a business deal or negotiation, 
there can be no conflict of interest, no matter how favorable the arrangement is for  
the employee.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.732                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Any bribery scheme we discussed in the previous section could occur as a conflict of 
interest. The only difference is the fraudster’s motive. For instance, if an employee approves 
payment on a fraudulent invoice submitted by a vendor in return for a kickback, this is 
bribery. If, on the other hand, an employee approves payment on invoices submitted by his 
own company (and if his ownership is undisclosed), this is a conflict of interest.  
 
The distinction between the two schemes is obvious. In the bribery case the fraudster 
approves the invoice in return for a kickback, while in a conflict case he approves the invoice 
because of his own hidden interest in the vendor. Aside from the employee’s motive for 
committing the crime, the mechanics of the two transactions are practically identical. The 
same duality can be found in bid-rigging cases, where an employee influences the selection 
of a company in which he has a hidden interest instead of influencing the selection of a 
vendor who has bribed him.  
 
Conflict schemes do not always simply mirror bribery schemes, though. There are a numbers 
of ways in which an employee can use his influence to benefit a company in which he has a 
hidden interest. This section will discuss some of the more common conflict schemes.  
 



:


conflict of interest
conflict of interest scheme gener constitut violat of the legal principl that a
fiduciari agent or employe must act in good faith with full disclosur and in the best
interest of the princip or employ a conflict of interest occur when an employe
manag or execut ha an undisclos econom or person interest in a transact that
advers affect that person employ as with other corrupt fraud conflict scheme
involv the exert of an employe influenc to the detriment of hi compani in briberi
scheme fraudster ar paid to exercis their influenc on behalf of a third parti conflict of
interest case instead involv selfdeal by an employe
if an employe engag in a transact that involv a conflict of interest then the
employe might also have breach hi fiduciari duti to hi employ an agent employe
ow a fiduciari duti duti of loyalti to the princip employ the agent must act sole in
the best interest of the princip and cannot seek to advanc person interest to the
detriment of the princip
breach of fiduciari duti is a civil action that can be us to redress a wide varieti of conduct
that might also constitut fraud commerci briberi and conflict of interest the element
of proof of breach of fiduciari duti ar consider simpler than fraud and do not requir
proof of wrong intent as in conflict of interest the wrongdoer must reimburs the
princip for ani loss and pai over profit earn even if the princip suffer no loss
the vast major of conflict of interest case occur becaus the fraudster ha an undisclos
econom interest in a transact but the fraudster hidden interest is not necessarili
econom in some scenario an employe act in a manner detriment to hi compani in
order to provid a benefit to a friend or rel even though the fraudster receiv no
financi benefit from the transact himself
in order to be classifi as a conflict of interest scheme the employe interest in the
transact must be undisclos the crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster take
advantag of hi employ the victim organ is unawar that it employe ha divid
loyalti if an employ know of the employe interest in a busi deal or negoti
there can be no conflict of interest no matter how favor the arrang is for
the employe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1732 2011 fraud examin manual
ani briberi scheme we discuss in the previou section could occur as a conflict of
interest the onli differ is the fraudster motiv for instanc if an employe approv
payment on a fraudul invoic submit by a vendor in return for a kickback thi is
briberi if on the other hand an employe approv payment on invoic submit by hi
own compani and if hi ownership is undisclos thi is a conflict of interest
the distinct between the two scheme is obviou in the briberi case the fraudster
approv the invoic in return for a kickback while in a conflict case he approv the invoic
becaus of hi own hidden interest in the vendor asid from the employe motiv for
commit the crime the mechan of the two transact ar practic ident the
same dualiti can be found in bidrig case where an employe influenc the select
of a compani in which he ha a hidden interest instead of influenc the select of a
vendor who ha bribe him
conflict scheme do not alwai simpli mirror briberi scheme though there ar a number
of wai in which an employe can us hi influenc to benefit a compani in which he ha a
hidden interest thi section will discuss some of the more common conflict scheme
