2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Conflicts of Interest/Purchase Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Purchase Schemes 
Purchase schemes are very similar to the billing schemes discussed in the Asset 
Misappropriation section, so it will be helpful at  this point to discuss the distinction we have 
drawn between traditional billing schemes and purchasing schemes that are conflicts of 
interest.  
 
While it is true that any time an employee assists in the overbilling of his company there is 
probably some conflict of interest (the employee causes harm to his employer because of a 
hidden financial interest in the transaction), this does not necessarily mean that every false 
billing will be categorized as a conflict scheme. In order for the scheme to be classified as a 
conflict of interest, the employee (or a friend or relative of the employee) must have some 
kind of ownership or employment interest in the vendor that submits the invoice.  
 
This distinction is easy to understand if we look at the nature of the fraud. Why does the 
fraudster overbill his employer? If he engages in  the scheme only for the cash, the scheme is 
a fraudulent disbursement billing scheme. If, on the other hand, he seeks to better the 
financial condition of his business at the expense of his employer, this is a conflict of 
interest. In other words, the fraudster’s interests  lie with a company other than his employer. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.733 
When an employee falsifies the invoices of a third-party vendor to whom he has no relation, 
this is not a conflict of interest scheme because the employee has no interest in that vendor. 
The sole purpose of the scheme is to generate a fraudulent disbursement.  
 
One might wonder, then, why shell company schemes are classified as fraudulent 
disbursements rather than conflicts of interest. After all, the fraudster in a shell company 
scheme owns the fictitious company and therefore must have an interest in it. Remember, 
though, that shell companies are created for the sole purpose of defrauding the employer. 
The company is not so much an entity in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool. In fact, a 
shell company is usually little more than a post office box and a bank account. The fraudster 
has no interest in the shell company that would cause a division of loyalty; he simply uses the 
shell company to bilk his employer. Shell company schemes are therefore classified as false 
billing schemes. 
 
A short rule of thumb can be used to distinguish between overbilling schemes that are 
classified as asset misappropriations and those that are conflicts of interest: if the bill 
originates from a real company  in which the fraudster has an economic or personal interest, 
and if the fraudster’s interest in the company is  undisclosed to the victim company, then the 
scheme is a conflict of interest.  
 
Now that we know what kinds of billing schemes are classified as conflicts of interest, the 
question is, how do these schemes work? After  our lengthy discussion about distinguishing 
between conflicts and fraudulent disbursements, the answer is somewhat anticlimactic. The 
schemes work the same either way. The mechanics of a billing scheme, whether conflicts or 
fraudulent disbursement, do not change. (See “Conflicts of Interest” flowchart.) 
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing superintendent de frauded his employer by purc hasing items from a certain 
vendor at inflated prices. The vendor in this case was owned by the purchasing 
superintendent but established in his wife’s name and run by his brother. The perpetrator’s 
interest in the company was undisclosed. The vendor would buy items on the open market, 
then inflate the prices and resell the items to the victim company. The purchasing 
superintendent used his influence to ensure that his employer continued doing business with 
the vendor and paying the exorbitant prices.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.734                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fraudsters also engage in bid-rigging on behalf of their own companies. The methods used 
to rig bids are discussed in detail in the Bribery section and will not be dealt with in depth 
here. Briefly stated, an employee of the purchasing company is in a perfect position to rig 
bids if he has access to the bids of his competitors. Since he can find out what prices other 
vendors have bid, the fraudster can easily tailor his own company’s bid to win the contract. 
Fraudsters also sometimes use bid waivers to avoid competitive bidding outright.  
 
EXAMPLE   
A manager processed several unsubstantiated bid waivers in order to direct purchases to a 
vendor in which one of his employees had an interest. The conflict was undisclosed and the 
scheme cost the victim company over $150,000.  
 
In other cases a fraudster might ignore his employer’s purchasing rotation and direct an 
inordinate number of purchases or contracts to his own company. Any way in which a 
fraudster exerts his influence to divert business to a company in which he has a hidden 
interest is a conflict of interest.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.735 



:


purchas scheme
purchas scheme ar veri similar to the bill scheme discuss in the asset
misappropri section so it will be help at thi point to discuss the distinct we have
drawn between tradit bill scheme and purchas scheme that ar conflict of
interest
while it is true that ani time an employe assist in the overbil of hi compani there is
probabl some conflict of interest the employe caus harm to hi employ becaus of a
hidden financi interest in the transact thi doe not necessarili mean that everi fals
bill will be categor as a conflict scheme in order for the scheme to be classifi as a
conflict of interest the employe or a friend or rel of the employe must have some
kind of ownership or employ interest in the vendor that submit the invoic
thi distinct is easi to understand if we look at the natur of the fraud why doe the
fraudster overbil hi employ if he engag in the scheme onli for the cash the scheme is
a fraudul disburs bill scheme if on the other hand he seek to better the
financi condit of hi busi at the expens of hi employ thi is a conflict of
interest in other word the fraudster interest lie with a compani other than hi employ
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1733
when an employe falsifi the invoic of a thirdparti vendor to whom he ha no relat
thi is not a conflict of interest scheme becaus the employe ha no interest in that vendor
the sole purpos of the scheme is to gener a fraudul disburs
on might wonder then why shell compani scheme ar classifi as fraudul
disburs rather than conflict of interest after all the fraudster in a shell compani
scheme own the fictiti compani and therefor must have an interest in it rememb
though that shell compani ar creat for the sole purpos of defraud the employ
the compani is not so much an entiti in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool in fact a
shell compani is usual littl more than a post offic box and a bank account the fraudster
ha no interest in the shell compani that would caus a divis of loyalti he simpli us the
shell compani to bilk hi employ shell compani scheme ar therefor classifi as fals
bill scheme
a short rule of thumb can be us to distinguish between overbil scheme that ar
classifi as asset misappropri and those that ar conflict of interest if the bill
origin from a real compani in which the fraudster ha an econom or person interest
and if the fraudster interest in the compani is undisclos to the victim compani then the
scheme is a conflict of interest
now that we know what kind of bill scheme ar classifi as conflict of interest the
question is how do these scheme work after our lengthi discuss about distinguish
between conflict and fraudul disburs the answer is somewhat anticlimact the
scheme work the same either wai the mechan of a bill scheme whether conflict or
fraudul disburs do not chang see conflict of interest flowchart
exampl
a purchas superintend de fraud hi employ by purc hase item from a certain
vendor at inflat price the vendor in thi case wa own by the purchas
superintend but establish in hi wife name and run by hi brother the perpetr
interest in the compani wa undisclos the vendor would bui item on the open market
then inflat the price and resel the item to the victim compani the purchas
superintend us hi influenc to ensur that hi employ continu do busi with
the vendor and pai the exorbit price
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1734 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster also engag in bidrig on behalf of their own compani the method us
to rig bid ar discuss in detail in the briberi section and will not be dealt with in depth
here briefli state an employe of the purchas compani is in a perfect posit to rig
bid if he ha access to the bid of hi competitor sinc he can find out what price other
vendor have bid the fraudster can easili tailor hi own compani bid to win the contract
fraudster also sometim us bid waiver to avoid competit bid outright
exampl
a manag process sever unsubstanti bid waiver in order to direct purchas to a
vendor in which on of hi employe had an interest the conflict wa undisclos and the
scheme cost the victim compani over 150000
in other case a fraudster might ignor hi employ purchas rotat and direct an
inordin number of purchas or contract to hi own compani ani wai in which a
fraudster exert hi influenc to divert busi to a compani in which he ha a hidden
interest is a conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1735
