2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 2 — Management/Key Employee Assessment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 2 — Management/Key Employee Assessment  
The management/key employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability 
of a fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls 
• Internal control environment 
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud 
 
1. Is the board of directors composed of mainly officers of the company or related individuals? 
The board of directors should include independent board members that are not associated 
with or employed by the company. In theory, independent directors are not subject to the 
same pressures as management and, therefore, are more likely to act in the best interest of 
shareholders. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is there an independent audit committee?  
Independent audit committee members with financial and accounting expertise can be 
instrumental in preventing and detecting financial fraud. 
 
3. Has there been high turnover of managers  and members of the board of directors? 
Management should investigate the reasons for high turnover and implement measures to 
reduce it. 
 
4. Have an unusually high number of key employees left the company recently?  
Management should investigate the reasons for their departure and implement measures to 
reduce turnover. 
 
5. Is the company involved in any litigation?  
Management should determine the reason for the litigation, monitor the filings, and take 
corrective action where necessary. 
 
6. Does the company have offshore activities or bank accounts?  
Management should determine the reason for the offshore activities and accounts, ascertain 
compliance with U.S. laws, and monitor activity closely. 
 
7. Do any of the senior managers have off shore bank accounts or business interests?  
The organization should require senior managers to file annual financial disclosure reports 
and explain the purpose of any offshore bank accounts or business interests. 
 
8. Are any key employees experiencing financial pressur es such as debts, gambling, medical bills, or divorce?  
Key employees who are experiencing financial pressures represent a potential fraud risk to 
the company and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can 
be made available to help employees with alcohol, drug, and other problems. 
 
9. Do any key employees appear to be living beyond their means? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars, extravagant vacations, or expensive clothing. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.835 
10. Do any key employees have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record? 
Key employees who have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record represent a potential 
fraud risk to the company and should be monitored by management. 
 
11. Do any key employees have a criminal conviction? 
Key employees with known criminal convictions should be subjected to increased review by 
management for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
12. Do one or two key employees appear to dominate the company?  
If control is centered in the hands of one or two key employees, then those individuals 
should be under heightened scrutiny for compliance with internal controls and other policies 
and procedures. 
 
13. Do any key employees have friends or relatives reporting directly to them?  
Organizations should prohibit key employees from  having friends or relatives report directly 
to them. 
 
14. Do any of the key employees appear to have a close association with a vendor?  
Key employees who have a close association with a vendor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
15. Do any key employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company?   
Key employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should be 
prohibited. 
 
16. Do any key employees own a portion of any company that does business with this company?  
Organizations should require key employees to disclose any potential conflicts of interest 
and should closely monitor any such conflicts of interest. 
 
17. Has any key employee failed to take vacation?  
Requiring key employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an 
ongoing fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running 
such a scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Do any key employees have a significant amount  of their net worth invested in the company?  
Management should subject key employees with  a significant amount of their net worth 
invested in the company to increased review for compliance with internal controls, especially 
those controls related to financial reporting. 
 
19. Does the company have unusually high debts? 
Management should determine the reason for debt levels and monitor internal controls for 
financial reporting. 
 
20. Is key employee compensation prim arily based on comp any performance? 
Organizations should monitor employees whose compensation is based primarily on 
company performance for compliance with internal controls, especially controls related to 
financial reporting. 
 
21. Is there an incentive to use inappropriate means to minimize earnings for tax reasons? 
Companies should remove any incentive to use inappropriate means to manipulate  
financial information. 
 
22. Is there excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price? 
Excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price can result in management 
manipulating financial results in order to meet expectations. 
 
23. Has the company recently experienced large operating or investment losses? 
Large operating or investment losses ca n place undue pressure on management to 
manipulate results in order to cover up the losses. 
 
24. Does the organization have sufficient working capital? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
25. Does the organization have sufficient credit?  
A lack of sufficient credit can place undue pressure on management to manipulate financial 
results in order to obtain credit. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.837 
26. Is the organization under pressu re to report favorable earnings?  
Excessive pressure to report favorable earnings can result in management committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet expectations. 
 
27. Does the company depend heavily on only a limited number of products or customers?  
Dependence on only a limited number of products or customers places a company at greater 
risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
28. Has the company experienced diff iculty in collecting receivables? 
Cash flow problems, which are a warning sign of possible fraud, can arise when a company 
experiences difficulty in collecting receivables. 
 
29. Has the company recently expanded rapidly into new business or product lines? 
Rapid expansion into new business or product lines can place tremendous financial pressure 
on a company. 
 
30. Has the company experienced a reduction in sales volume?  
A reduction in sales volume can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results. 
 
31. Does the company have strong competitors that are outperforming?  
Strong competition can place a company at greater risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
32. Is the company under pressure to  sell or merge with another company?  
Situational pressures that may lead to fraudulent acts can arise when a company is under 
pressure to sell or merge with another company. 
 
33. Does the company change auditors often? 
A frequent change in auditors is a red flag of fraud. 
 
34. Does the company delay or avoid supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete  
the audits?  
Delaying or avoiding supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete audits is 
an indicator of fraudulent activity. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
35. Does the company have problems with regulatory agencies? 
The company should determine the reasons for the problems with regulatory agencies and 
implement measures to encourage compliance with regulations. 
 
36. Does the company have poor accounting records? 
The company should implement proper accounting records. 
 
37. Does the accounting department appear to be inadequately staffed?  
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
38. Does the organization fail to disclose questionable or unusual accounting practices?  
Questionable or unusual accounting practices should be disclosed.  
 
39. Does the company have a number of la rge year-end or unusual transactions? 
Large year-end or unusual transactions should be investigated. 
 
40. Does the organization lack an adequate internal audit staff? 
The internal audit department should be adequately staffed. 
 
41. Does the organization lack an internal control syst em, or does it fail to enforce the existing internal 
controls? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 



:


modul 2 managementkei employe assess
the managementkei employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl
of a fraudul event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 is the board of director compos of mainli offic of the compani or relat individu
the board of director should includ independ board member that ar not associ
with or emploi by the compani in theori independ director ar not subject to the
same pressur as manag and therefor ar more like to act in the best interest of
sharehold
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4834 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is there an independ audit committe
independ audit committe member with financi and account expertis can be
instrument in prevent and detect financi fraud
3 ha there been high turnov of manag and member of the board of director
manag should investig the reason for high turnov and implement measur to
reduc it
4 have an unusu high number of kei employe left the compani recent
manag should investig the reason for their departur and implement measur to
reduc turnov
5 is the compani involv in ani litig
manag should determin the reason for the litig monitor the file and take
correct action where necessari
6 doe the compani have offshor activ or bank account
manag should determin the reason for the offshor activ and account ascertain
complianc with us law and monitor activ close
7 do ani of the senior manag have off shore bank account or busi interest
the organ should requir senior manag to file annual financi disclosur report
and explain the purpos of ani offshor bank account or busi interest
8 ar ani kei employe experienc financi pressur es such as debt gambl medic bill or divorc
kei employe who ar experienc financi pressur repres a potenti fraud risk to
the compani and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can
be made avail to help employe with alcohol drug and other problem
9 do ani kei employe appear to be live beyond their mean
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car extravag vacat or expens cloth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4835
10 do ani kei employe have civil judgment or bankruptci on record
kei employe who have civil judgment or bankruptci on record repres a potenti
fraud risk to the compani and should be monitor by manag
11 do ani kei employe have a crimin convict
kei employe with known crimin convict should be subject to increas review by
manag for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
12 do on or two kei employe appear to domin the compani
if control is center in the hand of on or two kei employe then those individu
should be under heighten scrutini for complianc with intern control and other polici
and procedur
13 do ani kei employe have friend or rel report directli to them
organ should prohibit kei employe from have friend or rel report directli
to them
14 do ani of the kei employe appear to have a close associ with a vendor
kei employe who have a close associ with a vendor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
15 do ani kei employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
kei employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest interest that conflict with the organ interest should be
prohibit
16 do ani kei employe own a portion of ani compani that doe busi with thi compani
organ should requir kei employe to disclos ani potenti conflict of interest
and should close monitor ani such conflict of interest
17 ha ani kei employe fail to take vacat
requir kei employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an
ongo fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run
such a scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4836 2011 fraud examin manual
18 do ani kei employe have a signific amount of their net worth invest in the compani
manag should subject kei employe with a signific amount of their net worth
invest in the compani to increas review for complianc with intern control especi
those control relat to financi report
19 doe the compani have unusu high debt
manag should determin the reason for debt level and monitor intern control for
financi report
20 is kei employe compens prim arili base on comp ani perform
organ should monitor employe whose compens is base primarili on
compani perform for complianc with intern control especi control relat to
financi report
21 is there an incent to us inappropri mean to minim earn for tax reason
compani should remov ani incent to us inappropri mean to manipul
financi inform
22 is there excess pressur to increas the compani stock price
excess pressur to increas the compani stock price can result in manag
manipul financi result in order to meet expect
23 ha the compani recent experienc larg oper or invest loss
larg oper or invest loss ca n place undu pressur on manag to
manipul result in order to cover up the loss
24 doe the organ have suffici work capit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
25 doe the organ have suffici credit
a lack of suffici credit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul financi
result in order to obtain credit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4837
26 is the organ under pressu re to report favor earn
excess pressur to report favor earn can result in manag commit
fraudul act in order to meet expect
27 doe the compani depend heavili on onli a limit number of product or custom
depend on onli a limit number of product or custom place a compani at greater
risk for fraudul act to occur
28 ha the compani experienc diff iculti in collect receiv
cash flow problem which ar a warn sign of possibl fraud can aris when a compani
experi difficulti in collect receiv
29 ha the compani recent expand rapidli into new busi or product line
rapid expans into new busi or product line can place tremend financi pressur
on a compani
30 ha the compani experienc a reduct in sale volum
a reduct in sale volum can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
31 doe the compani have strong competitor that ar outperform
strong competit can place a compani at greater risk for fraudul act to occur
32 is the compani under pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
situat pressur that mai lead to fraudul act can aris when a compani is under
pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
33 doe the compani chang auditor often
a frequent chang in auditor is a red flag of fraud
34 doe the compani delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet
the audit
delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet audit is
an indic of fraudul activ
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4838 2011 fraud examin manual
35 doe the compani have problem with regulatori agenc
the compani should determin the reason for the problem with regulatori agenc and
implement measur to encourag complianc with regul
36 doe the compani have poor account record
the compani should implement proper account record
37 doe the account depart appear to be inadequ staf
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
38 doe the organ fail to disclos question or unusu account practic
question or unusu account practic should be disclos
39 doe the compani have a number of la rge yearend or unusu transact
larg yearend or unusu transact should be investig
40 doe the organ lack an adequ intern audit staff
the intern audit depart should be adequ staf
41 doe the organ lack an intern control syst em or doe it fail to enforc the exist intern
control
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
