2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 5 — Cash Larceny Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 5 — Cash Larceny Schemes  
Cash larceny schemes include: 
• Stealing cash at the point of sale or register. 
• Stealing cash receipts posted to sales and receivable journals. 
• Stealing cash from bank deposits. 
 
1. Are cash register tape totals reconc iled to the amount in the cash drawer?  
Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount in the cash drawer. Any 
discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and agreeing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register tape totals. 
 
3. Is access to registers or the cash box closely monitored? Are access codes kept secure? 
Access to registers or the cash box should be closely monitored and access codes should be 
kept secure. 
 
4. Are customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting handled by someone other than the 
employee who receives the cash?  
Customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting should be handled by 
someone other than the employee who receives the cash. 
 
5. Are register workers properly supervised? 
Register workers should be properly supervised by on-duty supervisors or CCTV recording 
of register activity. 
 
6. Are CCTV cameras and digital recorders used to monitor register areas?  
CCTV cameras and digital recorders can be used to monitor register areas. 
 
7. Is each receivable transaction reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation?  
Receivable transactions should be reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation. 
 
8. Is an independent listing of cash receipts prepared  before the receipts are submitted to the cashier or 
accounts receivable bookkeeper? 
An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are submitted 
to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
 
9. Does a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions compare entries to the cash 
receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and bank deposit statements?  
Companies should assign a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable 
functions to compare entries to the cash receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and 
bank deposit statements. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.845 
10. Are the cash receipts, cash counts, bank deposits, deposit receipt reconciliation s, bank reconciliations, 
posting of deposits, and cash disbursements duties segregated?  
The primary way to prevent cash larceny is to segregate duties. 
 
11. Does an employee other than the cashier or accounts  receivable bookkeeper make the daily bank deposit?  
Having an employee other than the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper make  
the daily bank deposit is an important segregation of duties that can help to prevent  
cash larceny. 
 
12. Is job or assignment rotation mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties?  
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. 
 
13. Are vacations mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties? 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory vacations, the concealment 
element is interrupted.  
 
14. Are surprise cash counts conducted? 
Surprise cash counts help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, destroy, and 
misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
15. Are journal entries made to  the cash accounts reviewed and analyzed on a regular basis?  
Journal entries made to the cash accounts  should be reviewed and analyzed on a  
regular basis. 
 
16. Does the company use a point of sale (POS) system?  
A POS system will allow the organization to gather sales information in a comprehensive 
and timely format. 
  
17. Does the POS system track perpetual inventory? 
The POS system should be configured to track perpetual inventory. 
  
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Does the POS system track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales,  overages, and shortages?  
The POS system should be configured to track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales, 
overages, and shortages. 
 
19. Are register exception reports reviewed on a regular basis?  
Register exception reports should be reviewed on a regular basis by management. 
 
20. Are all employees, except for managers, prohibited from making changes to the POS system? 
All employees, except for managers, should be prohibited from making changes to the  
POS system. 
 
21. Is access to the accounts receivable subledger and the general ledger restricted to authorized employees? 
Does access leave an audit trail?  
Access to the accounts receivable subledger and general ledger should be restricted to 
authorized employees. An audit trail of who accessed the ledgers, including time and date of 
access, should be kept. 
 



:


modul 5 cash larceni scheme
cash larceni scheme includ
steal cash at the point of sale or regist
steal cash receipt post to sale and receiv journal
steal cash from bank deposit
1 ar cash regist tape total reconc il to the amount in the cash drawer
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount in the cash drawer ani
discrep should be investig
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4844 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and agre
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist tape total
3 is access to regist or the cash box close monitor ar access code kept secur
access to regist or the cash box should be close monitor and access code should be
kept secur
4 ar custom complaint regard short chang or improp post handl by someon other than the
employe who receiv the cash
custom complaint regard short chang or improp post should be handl by
someon other than the employe who receiv the cash
5 ar regist worker properli supervis
regist worker should be properli supervis by onduti supervisor or cctv record
of regist activ
6 ar cctv camera and digit record us to monitor regist area
cctv camera and digit record can be us to monitor regist area
7 is each receiv transact review for legitimaci and support document
receiv transact should be review for legitimaci and support document
8 is an independ list of cash receipt prepar befor the receipt ar submit to the cashier or
account receiv bookkeep
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar submit
to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
9 doe a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv function compar entri to the cash
receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and bank deposit statement
compani should assign a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv
function to compar entri to the cash receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and
bank deposit statement
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4845
10 ar the cash receipt cash count bank deposit deposit receipt reconcili s bank reconcili
post of deposit and cash disburs duti segreg
the primari wai to prevent cash larceni is to segreg duti
11 doe an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make the daili bank deposit
have an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make
the daili bank deposit is an import segreg of duti that can help to prevent
cash larceni
12 is job or assign rotat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt
13 ar vacat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori vacat the conceal
element is interrupt
14 ar surpris cash count conduct
surpris cash count help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter destroi and
misplac record and other evid of their offens
15 ar journal entri made to the cash account review and analyz on a regular basi
journal entri made to the cash account should be review and analyz on a
regular basi
16 doe the compani us a point of sale po system
a po system will allow the organ to gather sale inform in a comprehens
and time format
17 doe the po system track perpetu inventori
the po system should be configur to track perpetu inventori
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4846 2011 fraud examin manual
18 doe the po system track except such as void refund no sale overag and shortag
the po system should be configur to track except such as void refund no sale
overag and shortag
19 ar regist except report review on a regular basi
regist except report should be review on a regular basi by manag
20 ar all employe except for manag prohibit from make chang to the po system
all employe except for manag should be prohibit from make chang to the
po system
21 is access to the account receiv subledg and the gener ledger restrict to author employe
doe access leav an audit trail
access to the account receiv subledg and gener ledger should be restrict to
author employe an audit trail of who access the ledger includ time and date of
access should be kept
