2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 8 — Purchasing and Billing Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 8 — Purchasing and Billing Schemes  
• Shell company schemes occur when an employee submits invoices for payment from a 
fictitious company controlled by the employee. 
• Pay-and-return schemes occur when an employee arranges for overpayment of a vendor 
invoice and pockets the overpayment amount when it is returned to the company. 
• Personal purchase schemes occur when an employee submits an invoice for personal 
purchases to the company for payment, or when an employee uses a company credit 
card for personal purchases. 
 
1. Does the organization have a purchasing department? 
The organization should have a purchasing department that is separate from the  
payment function. 
 
2. Is the purchasing department independent of the accounting, receiving, and shipping departments?  
The purchasing department should be independent of the accounting, receiving, and 
shipping departments. 
 
3. Do purchase requisitions require management approval?  
Management should approve all purchase requisitions. 
 
4. Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates?  
Purchase orders should specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates. 
 
5. Are purchase order forms pre-numbered and accounted for? 
Purchase order forms should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
6. Does the company maintain a master vendor file?  
The company should maintain a master vendor file. 
 
7. Are competitive bids required for all purchases? 
Companies should require competitive bids for all purchases. 
 
8. Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? 
The receiving department should prepare receiving reports for all items received. 
 
9. Does the receiving department main tain a log of all items received?  
The receiving department should maintain a log of all items received. 
 
10. Are copies of receiving reports furnished to  the accounting and purchasing departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be furnished to the accounting and  
purchasing departments. 
 
11. Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts payable, and general 
ledger functions?  
Purchasing and receiving functions should be segregated from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions. 
 
12. Are vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related liability is recorded?  
Companies should match vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders before 
recording the related liability. 
 
13. Are purchase orders recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed through  
cash disbursements?  
Purchase orders should be recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being 
processed through cash disbursements. 
 
14. Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to the customer is 
promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a receivable and a payable?  
Companies should implement procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased 
for direct delivery to the customer is promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a 
receivable and a payable. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.853 
15. Are records of goods returned to ve ndors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Records of goods returned to vendors should be matched to vendor credit memos. 
 
16. Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register re conciled monthly to the general ledger control accounts? 
The accounts payable ledger or voucher register should be reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts. 
 
17. Do write-offs of accounts payable debit bala nces require approval of a designated manager?  
Write-offs of accounts payable debit balances should require approval of a  
designated manager. 
 
18. Is the master vendor file periodically  reviewed for unusual vendors and addresses?  
The master vendor file should be reviewed periodically for unusual vendors and addresses. 
 
19. Are vendor purchases analyzed for abnormal levels? 
Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels. 
 
20. Are control methods in place to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers? 
Companies should implement control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase 
order numbers. 
 
21. Are credit card statements re viewed monthly for irregularities?  
Credit card statements should be reviewed monthly for irregularities. 
 
22. Are vendors with post office box addresses verified? 
All vendors with post office box addresses should be verified. 
 
23. Are voucher payments reviewed regularly for proper documentation? 
Voucher payments should be reviewed regularly for proper documentation. 
 
24. Is access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger restricted? Does access create an  
audit trail? 
Access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger should be restricted and an 
audit trail should be created. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


modul 8 purchas and bill scheme
shell compani scheme occur when an employe submit invoic for payment from a
fictiti compani control by the employe
payandreturn scheme occur when an employe arrang for overpay of a vendor
invoic and pocket the overpay amount when it is return to the compani
person purchas scheme occur when an employe submit an invoic for person
purchas to the compani for payment or when an employe us a compani credit
card for person purchas
1 doe the organ have a purchas depart
the organ should have a purchas depart that is separ from the
payment function
2 is the purchas depart independ of the account receiv and ship depart
the purchas depart should be independ of the account receiv and
ship depart
3 do purchas requisit requir manag approv
manag should approv all purchas requisit
4 do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
purchas order should specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
5 ar purchas order form prenumb and account for
purchas order form should be prenumb and account for
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4852 2011 fraud examin manual
6 doe the compani maintain a master vendor file
the compani should maintain a master vendor file
7 ar competit bid requir for all purchas
compani should requir competit bid for all purchas
8 doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv
the receiv depart should prepar receiv report for all item receiv
9 doe the receiv depart main tain a log of all item receiv
the receiv depart should maintain a log of all item receiv
10 ar copi of receiv report furnish to the account and purchas depart
copi of receiv report should be furnish to the account and
purchas depart
11 ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account payabl and gener
ledger function
purchas and receiv function should be segreg from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
12 ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat liabil is record
compani should match vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order befor
record the relat liabil
13 ar purchas order record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process through
cash disburs
purchas order should be record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be
process through cash disburs
14 ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to the custom is
promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and a payabl
compani should implement procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas
for direct deliveri to the custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a
receiv and a payabl
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4853
15 ar record of good return to ve ndor match to vendor credit memo
record of good return to vendor should be match to vendor credit memo
16 is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist re concil monthli to the gener ledger control account
the account payabl ledger or voucher regist should be reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
17 do writeoff of account payabl debit bala nce requir approv of a design manag
writeoff of account payabl debit balanc should requir approv of a
design manag
18 is the master vendor file period review for unusu vendor and address
the master vendor file should be review period for unusu vendor and address
19 ar vendor purchas analyz for abnorm level
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level
20 ar control method in place to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number
compani should implement control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas
order number
21 ar credit card statement re view monthli for irregular
credit card statement should be review monthli for irregular
22 ar vendor with post offic box address verifi
all vendor with post offic box address should be verifi
23 ar voucher payment review regularli for proper document
voucher payment should be review regularli for proper document
24 is access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger restrict doe access creat an
audit trail
access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger should be restrict and an
audit trail should be creat
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4854 2011 fraud examin manual
