2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


The Charging Process 
Once the government has arrested someone for a crime, the person under arrest must be 
brought before a magistrate without “unnecessary delay.” This is known as the “initial 
appearance.” At this time, the arresting officer must swear to a complaint, establishing 
probable cause, if the arrest was without a warrant. The defendant will then be advised of 
the nature of the complaint, of the right to retain counsel or to appointed counsel, and of 
the general circumstances under which pre-trial release may be obtained. 
 
For most offenses, individuals that are in police custody can post bail and be released 
pending trial. Bail is a money bond to ensure that defendants will show up for trial. If a 
defendant fails to show up, the bond is forfeited, and a warrant for the defendant’s arrest is 
issued. 
 
The Eighth Amendment, however, prohibits “excessive bail.” The Supreme Court has held 
that the Eighth Amendment does not absolutely require pre-trial release, only that if bail is 
appropriate, it be set no higher than necessary to assure the defendant’s presence at trial. If, 
under the circumstances, the presiding judge decides that release would pose a serious threat 
to the safety of the community or to a particular individual, or that no amount of bail or 
particular conditions of release would prevent the defendant from fleeing, the judge can 
deny bail to keep the defendant in custody. 
 
At the initial appearance, a defendant who has not yet been indicted also is informed of his 
right to a preliminary examination. This is a formal, adversary hearing before a judge where 
the defendant may be represented by counsel and can cross-examine witnesses. The purpose 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.506  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of the hearing is to determine whether there is probable cause to hold the defendant for 
further proceedings, not to establish guilt or innocence. Because of its limited purpose, 
hearsay and even illegally obtained evidence can be admissible. Motions to suppress must be 
made to the trial court. 
 
If the magistrate determines at the preliminary examination that there is no probable cause, 
the complaint will be dismissed and the defendant released. But the government may 
institute a subsequent prosecution for the same offense, presumably with better evidence. 
Preliminary examinations often are used by defense counsel as an opportunity to get free 
“discovery” of the details of the prosecution’s case.  
 
Because some defendants may use preliminary examinations to obtain information, some 
prosecutors prefer to obtain a grand jury indictment. A grand jury indictment is held to 
satisfy the probable cause requirements of the Fifth Amendment and precludes the need for 
the preliminary examination. (Every state in the U.S. has provisions for a grand jury, but not 
all use the option.) 
 



:


the charg process
onc the govern ha arrest someon for a crime the person under arrest must be
brought befor a magistr without unnecessari delai thi is known as the initi
appear at thi time the arrest offic must swear to a complaint establish
probabl caus if the arrest wa without a warrant the defend will then be advis of
the natur of the complaint of the right to retain counsel or to appoint counsel and of
the gener circumst under which pretrial releas mai be obtain
for most offens individu that ar in polic custodi can post bail and be releas
pend trial bail is a monei bond to ensur that defend will show up for trial if a
defend fail to show up the bond is forfeit and a warrant for the defend arrest is
issu
the eighth amend howev prohibit excess bail the suprem court ha held
that the eighth amend doe not absolut requir pretrial releas onli that if bail is
appropri it be set no higher than necessari to assur the defend presenc at trial if
under the circumst the presid judg decid that releas would pose a seriou threat
to the safeti of the commun or to a particular individu or that no amount of bail or
particular condit of releas would prevent the defend from flee the judg can
deni bail to keep the defend in custodi
at the initi appear a defend who ha not yet been indict also is inform of hi
right to a preliminari examin thi is a formal adversari hear befor a judg where
the defend mai be repres by counsel and can crossexamin wit the purpos
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2506 2011 fraud examin manual
of the hear is to determin whether there is probabl caus to hold the defend for
further proceed not to establish guilt or innoc becaus of it limit purpos
hearsai and even illeg obtain evid can be admiss motion to suppress must be
made to the trial court
if the magistr determin at the preliminari examin that there is no probabl caus
the complaint will be dismiss and the defend releas but the govern mai
institut a subsequ prosecut for the same offens presum with better evid
preliminari examin often ar us by defens counsel as an opportun to get free
discoveri of the detail of the prosecut case
becaus some defend mai us preliminari examin to obtain inform some
prosecutor prefer to obtain a grand juri indict a grand juri indict is held to
satisfi the probabl caus requir of the fifth amend and preclud the need for
the preliminari examin everi state in the us ha provis for a grand juri but not
all us the option
