2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Trial Process/Presenting Evidence


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Presenting Evidence 
After the opening statements, each side presents its case. That is, each side presents 
witnesses and exhibits to build its case.  
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.518  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, the side with the burden of proof presents its case first. Thus, in criminal trial, the 
prosecution presents its case first because it bears the burden of proving every element of 
the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defense is under no obligation to produce any 
evidence at any time. 
 
The trial begins by calling witnesses to the stand for direct examination — the initial questioning 
by the side that called the witness. After the direct examination, the opposing party can 
submit these witnesses to cross-examination, referring to questioning of one side’s witness by 
the opposing side, but the opposing party may waive this right and proceed without 
questions. After cross-examination is complete, the party that called the witness can, if it 
chooses, reopen direct (referred to as redirect examination ), which may be followed by re-cross  
questioning by the opposing party. At the end of questioning, each witness is dismissed, 
though the person can be called again later by either side. 
 
Most evidence presented in court comes from di rect testimony. As a general rule, a witness’s 
testimony must be confined to facts within personal knowledge rather than conjecture or 
opinion. A duly qualified expert witness, however, may give an opinion if the court 
determines that it will assist the jury to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in 
issue. Accountants and fraud examiners may be (and often are) called to testify in fraud cases 
as lay witnesses, experts, or both. See the chapter on “Testifying as an Expert Witness” for 
more information. 
 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant the right to confront and cross-examine 
witnesses. This is a principal reason why hearsay evidence — statements made out of court 
and not based on a witness’ direct knowledge — generally is excluded. Under the Sixth 
Amendment’s confrontation clause, a witness’s out-of-court statements are not admissible at 
trial unless the witness is testifying at trial and is subject to cross-examination. When hearsay 
is used instead of live testimony, the defendant can argue that the hearsay declarant was a 
witness and that the defendant was not afforded the opportunity to confront the witness. If 
a judge unduly restricts a defendant’s right to probe the prosecution’s witnesses’ credibility 
or knowledge of the facts, a conviction may be reversed.  
 
During trial, a party may object to the admission of evidence. The admission of evidence and 
objections thereto are ruled on by the trial judge. The rules of evidence are complex but can 
be summarized as follows: they intend to limit the evidence presented to the jury to only 
matters relevant to the specific charges, and to exclude unreliable or unduly prejudicial 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.519 
evidence. The same piece of evidence, however, may be admissible or inadmissible 
depending on the specific reason for which it is being offered. For example, evidence of 
other similar crimes or wrongful acts by the defendant may not be offered by the 
prosecution merely to show that the defendant is more likely to have committed the crime 
charged. But the same evidence may be introduced to prove intent, if disputed by the 
defendant, to rebut a claim of accident or mistake, or to impeach false testimony by the 
accused. 
 
At the close of the prosecution’s case, the defense usually moves for a judgment of acquittal 
on the ground that the prosecution’s evidence — even if believed—is legally insufficient to 
convict. If the judge grants the motion, the trial ends and the defendant is acquitted. If the 
motion is denied, the defendant may elect to present evidence or may rest. 
 
After the prosecution has presented its case, the defense will make its case. If the defendant 
elects to testify, he is subject to cross-examination, and the prosecution may impeach the 
defendant’s credibility by showing prior convictions. This usually is a deathblow to the 
defense and is the reason many defendants do not testify. The judge, however, may exclude 
such evidence as unduly prejudicial, particularly if the prior crime is remote in time or did 
not involve dishonesty or false statements. 
 
A defendant is entitled to call character witnesses on his behalf who often have no 
knowledge of the charges or facts in issue, but who are prepared to testify to the defendant’s 
character. Such testimony must be given in the form of the witness’s opinion or testimony as 
to the defendant’s general good reputation; testimony as to specific incidents of good 
conduct is not permitted because such would prove too confusing and time-consuming. 
Moreover, because any character evidence is ci rcumstantial at best, it is considered 
permissible to limit the testimony to reputation or opinion. Character witnesses may be 
asked on cross-examination if they have “heard about” alleged wrongful or dishonest acts by 
the accused, including a prior conviction. 
 



:


present evid
after the open statement each side present it case that is each side present
wit and exhibit to build it case
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2518 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener the side with the burden of proof present it case first thu in crimin trial the
prosecut present it case first becaus it bear the burden of prove everi element of
the offens beyond a reason doubt the defens is under no oblig to produc ani
evid at ani time
the trial begin by call wit to the stand for direct examin the initi question
by the side that call the wit after the direct examin the oppos parti can
submit these wit to crossexamin refer to question of on side wit by
the oppos side but the oppos parti mai waiv thi right and proce without
question after crossexamin is complet the parti that call the wit can if it
choos reopen direct refer to as redirect examin which mai be follow by recross
question by the oppos parti at the end of question each wit is dismiss
though the person can be call again later by either side
most evid present in court come from di rect testimoni as a gener rule a witnesss
testimoni must be confin to fact within person knowledg rather than conjectur or
opinion a duli qualifi expert wit howev mai give an opinion if the court
determin that it will assist the juri to understand the evid or to determin a fact in
issu account and fraud examin mai be and often ar call to testifi in fraud case
as lai wit expert or both see the chapter on testifi as an expert wit for
more inform
the sixth amend guarante a defend the right to confront and crossexamin
wit thi is a princip reason why hearsai evid statement made out of court
and not base on a wit direct knowledg gener is exclud under the sixth
amend confront claus a witnesss outofcourt statement ar not admiss at
trial unless the wit is testifi at trial and is subject to crossexamin when hearsai
is us instead of live testimoni the defend can argu that the hearsai declar wa a
wit and that the defend wa not afford the opportun to confront the wit if
a judg unduli restrict a defend right to probe the prosecut wit credibl
or knowledg of the fact a convict mai be revers
dure trial a parti mai object to the admiss of evid the admiss of evid and
object thereto ar rule on by the trial judg the rule of evid ar complex but can
be summar as follow thei intend to limit the evid present to the juri to onli
matter relev to the specif charg and to exclud unreli or unduli prejudici
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2519
evid the same piec of evid howev mai be admiss or inadmiss
depend on the specif reason for which it is be offer for exampl evid of
other similar crime or wrong act by the defend mai not be offer by the
prosecut mere to show that the defend is more like to have commit the crime
charg but the same evid mai be introduc to prove intent if disput by the
defend to rebut a claim of accid or mistak or to impeach fals testimoni by the
accus
at the close of the prosecut case the defens usual move for a judgment of acquitt
on the ground that the prosecut evid even if believedi legal insuffici to
convict if the judg grant the motion the trial end and the defend is acquit if the
motion is deni the defend mai elect to present evid or mai rest
after the prosecut ha present it case the defens will make it case if the defend
elect to testifi he is subject to crossexamin and the prosecut mai impeach the
defend credibl by show prior convict thi usual is a deathblow to the
defens and is the reason mani defend do not testifi the judg howev mai exclud
such evid as unduli prejudici particularli if the prior crime is remot in time or did
not involv dishonesti or fals statement
a defend is entitl to call charact wit on hi behalf who often have no
knowledg of the charg or fact in issu but who ar prepar to testifi to the defend
charact such testimoni must be given in the form of the witnesss opinion or testimoni as
to the defend gener good reput testimoni as to specif incid of good
conduct is not permit becaus such would prove too confus and timeconsum
moreov becaus ani charact evid is ci rcumstanti at best it is consid
permiss to limit the testimoni to reput or opinion charact wit mai be
ask on crossexamin if thei have heard about alleg wrong or dishonest act by
the accus includ a prior convict
