2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Profiles of Offenders


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Profiles of Offenders 
The wide array of crimes called “white-collar”—f rom anti-trust and securities violations to 
bank embezzlement and credit fraud—makes a ssembling a profile of the typical offender 
difficult, but not impossible. Most defendants are white males, with a modera te social status. 
They are slightly more likely than the general population to have a high school diploma (78 
percent versus 69 percent), or a college degree (24.7 percent versus 19 percent for the 
general public). The majority, then, are not highly educated, and in at least one category—
 owning one’s home—the offenders fall behind the average citizen: while 55 percent of 
Americans own their homes, only 45.3 percent of the offenders do. Social status is a factor 
in white-collar criminality, but as the authors point out, “The position conferred by status, 
rather than status itself, empowers the offender.” 5 So a corporate manager, who was 
promoted from inside the company with only a ninth-grade education and who doesn’t own 
his home, is not as atypical an offender as might be supposed. The key is that, by his 
position in his company, he has the opportunity and means to commit a crime.  
 
                                                 
3 Weisburd, David, et al. Crimes of the Middle Classes. White-Collar Offenders in the Federal Courts.  New Haven: Yale 
UP, 1991 
4 Weisburd, p. xiv. 
5 Weisburd, p. 61. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.407  



:


profil of offend
the wide arrai of crime call whitecollarf rom antitrust and secur violat to
bank embezzl and credit fraudmak a ssembl a profil of the typic offend
difficult but not imposs most defend ar white male with a modera te social statu
thei ar slightli more like than the gener popul to have a high school diploma 78
percent versu 69 percent or a colleg degre 247 percent versu 19 percent for the
gener public the major then ar not highli educ and in at least on categori
own on hometh offend fall behind the averag citizen while 55 percent of
american own their home onli 453 percent of the offend do social statu is a factor
in whitecollar crimin but as the author point out the posit confer by statu
rather than statu itself empow the offend 5 so a corpor manag who wa
promot from insid the compani with onli a ninthgrad educ and who doesnt own
hi home is not as atyp an offend as might be suppos the kei is that by hi
posit in hi compani he ha the opportun and mean to commit a crime
3 weisburd david et al crime of the middl class whitecollar offend in the feder court new haven yale
up 1991
4 weisburd p xiv
5 weisburd p 61
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4407
