2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Judgments


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Judgments 
Judgments against white-collar defendants often  involve an assessment of personal suffering. 
It is widely held that, when convicted of a crime, these people suffer a greater blow 
                                                 
13 Postal theft and postal forgery were selected as economic crimes without a direct link to violence. Other 
common crimes, such as burglaries or larceny, are state offenses, and thus are not appropriate to this study of 
the federal system. Postal theft involves acts like stealing government-issued checks, such as welfare payments; 
postal forgery involves the act of cashing these items. Clearly, the choice of these crimes (and not others) for 
comparison is debatable. 
14 Weisburd, p. 114. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.412   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
personally and professionally than street criminals. Many observers think this suffering 
should be acknowledged in assessing a sentence. One federal judge is quoted as saying: 
 
The white-collar criminal by virt ue of his conviction has suffered a loss of position, usually 
loss of employment, sometimes status in his profession, other times the ability to ever find 
employment in anything requiring a fidelity bond or what have you. Whereas the common 
street criminal hasn’t had a career loss of a similar nature; indeed, in some areas the 
conviction of a crime is some sort of a badge of maturity. 15  
 



:


judgment
judgment against whitecollar defend often involv an assess of person suffer
it is wide held that when convict of a crime these peopl suffer a greater blow
13 postal theft and postal forgeri were select as econom crime without a direct link to violenc other
common crime such as burglari or larceni ar state offens and thu ar not appropri to thi studi of
the feder system postal theft involv act like steal governmentissu check such as welfar payment
postal forgeri involv the act of cash these item clearli the choic of these crime and not other for
comparison is debat
14 weisburd p 114
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4412 2011 fraud examin manual
person and profession than street crimin mani observ think thi suffer
should be acknowledg in assess a sentenc on feder judg is quot as sai
the whitecollar crimin by virt ue of hi convict ha suffer a loss of posit usual
loss of employ sometim statu in hi profess other time the abil to ever find
employ in anyth requir a fidel bond or what have you wherea the common
street crimin hasnt had a career loss of a similar natur inde in some area the
convict of a crime is some sort of a badg of matur 15
