2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Personal Suffering


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Personal Suffering 
Examining PSIs, the authors found that in about 65 percent of the cases overall, personal 
suffering was said to have played an overwhelming role in the defendant’s case. Securities 
offenders and embezzlers topped the list, with 70 and 87 percent of these people 
(respectively) reporting some hardship. Of course, the reports involved statements by the 
defendants or their families, which could be self-serving.  
 
And in actually looking at objective material—such as the loss of employment, marital 
separations and divorce, or mental health problems—the authors found the results 
“ambiguous.” Credit fraud perpetrators, for example, seldom reported any suffering, but 
they had a 20 percent divorce rate during the time of their prosecution, the highest in the 
study. And there were often large gaps between different types of crimes. Compared to the 
securities offenders, with a 70 percent rate of suffering, only about 24 percent of anti-trust 
offenders had similar complaints. The discrepancy may lie in how different crimes are 
viewed. “Anti-trust violators, who steal for their companies and actually provide the 
services they say they do,” aren’t seen as harshly as “those who steal from their 
companies.” 16 Securities offenders are stigmatized “b ecause their crimes are often against 
their own clients,” while bank embezzlers (with over 87 percent reported suffering) are 
judged with particular strictness “because they steal from their employers.” 17 
 
In summary, the authors believe that the extra legal suffering of white-collar defendants has 
some validity, but it’s not always possible to be sure that prosecution alone caused the 
hardship. The contradictory images of these criminals as both exceptionally privileged and 
                                                 
15 Weisburd, p. 116. 
16 Weisburd, p. 124. 
17 Weisburd, p. 125. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.413  
especially harassed “overstate their real experience in the legal system.” Neither factor is as 
great as the standard rhetoric might suggest.  
 



:


person suffer
examin psi the author found that in about 65 percent of the case overal person
suffer wa said to have plai an overwhelm role in the defend case secur
offend and embezzl top the list with 70 and 87 percent of these peopl
respect report some hardship of cours the report involv statement by the
defend or their famili which could be selfserv
and in actual look at object materialsuch as the loss of employ marit
separ and divorc or mental health problemsth author found the result
ambigu credit fraud perpetr for exampl seldom report ani suffer but
thei had a 20 percent divorc rate dure the time of their prosecut the highest in the
studi and there were often larg gap between differ type of crime compar to the
secur offend with a 70 percent rate of suffer onli about 24 percent of antitrust
offend had similar complaint the discrep mai lie in how differ crime ar
view antitrust violat who steal for their compani and actual provid the
servic thei sai thei do arent seen as harshli as those who steal from their
compani 16 secur offend ar stigmat b ecaus their crime ar often against
their own client while bank embezzl with over 87 percent report suffer ar
judg with particular strict becaus thei steal from their employ 17
in summari the author believ that the extra legal suffer of whitecollar defend ha
some valid but it not alwai possibl to be sure that prosecut alon caus the
hardship the contradictori imag of these crimin as both exception privileg and
15 weisburd p 116
16 weisburd p 124
17 weisburd p 125
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4413
especi harass overst their real experi in the legal system neither factor is as
great as the standard rhetor might suggest
