2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Federal Regulation/Investment Company Act of 1940


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Investment Company Act of 1940 
Under the Investment Company Act of 1940, investment companies are required to register 
with the SEC, which also regulates their activities. This Act dictates qualifications for officers 
and directors, requires that certain matters are submitted for stockholder approval, and 
mandates SEC permission for certain transactions such as those between insiders and 
affiliates. It divides investment companies into three categories: 
• Face-amount certificate companies — Any comp any engaged in issuing fixed income 
debenture type securities. 
• Unit investment trusts—Companies organized under a trust indenture, contract of 
agency, or those similar in nature, which do not have a board of directors and issue only 
redeemable securities. 
• Management companies — Firms that do not fit the criteria of the first two categories fall 
into this one. This includes open and closed-end companies, whether listed on securities 
exchanges or not. “Open-end” companies are commonly referred to as mutual funds 
and the net asset value of a share is calculated based on the market value of the fund’s 
portfolio divided by the number of shares outstanding. The shares of “closed-end” 
companies trade in a similar manner to regular stocks, i.e., the value is determined by the 
market forces of supply and demand.  
 
Although there are criminal penalties attached to violations of the federal securities laws, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission does not have the power to take criminal action. SEC 
investigations that disclose potentially criminal violations are usually referred to the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation.  
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1504                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Less serious violations may be addressed using  the Commission’s administrative powers. The 
SEC has the power to issue “cease and desist” orders, levy fines, and order disgorgement  
of profits. 
 



:


invest compani act of 1940
under the invest compani act of 1940 invest compani ar requir to regist
with the sec which also regul their activ thi act dictat qualif for offic
and director requir that certain matter ar submit for stockhold approv and
mandat sec permiss for certain transact such as those between insid and
affili it divid invest compani into three categori
faceamount certif compani ani comp ani engag in issu fix incom
debentur type secur
unit invest trustscompani organ under a trust indentur contract of
agenc or those similar in natur which do not have a board of director and issu onli
redeem secur
manag compani firm that do not fit the criteria of the first two categori fall
into thi on thi includ open and closedend compani whether list on secur
exchang or not openend compani ar commonli refer to as mutual fund
and the net asset valu of a share is calcul base on the market valu of the fund
portfolio divid by the number of share outstand the share of closedend
compani trade in a similar manner to regular stock ie the valu is determin by the
market forc of suppli and demand
although there ar crimin penalti attach to violat of the feder secur law the
secur and exchang commiss doe not have the power to take crimin action sec
investig that disclos potenti crimin violat ar usual refer to the feder
bureau of investig
secur fraud financi transact
11504 2011 fraud examin manual
less seriou violat mai be address us the commiss administr power the
sec ha the power to issu ceas and desist order levi fine and order disgorg
of profit
