2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options 
There have been numerous frauds involving commodity futures, exchange-traded options, 
and OTC options. In December 1994, Orange County California became the largest 
municipality ever to file for bankruptcy. This was largely caused by risky investment 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1526                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
strategies utilizing OTC options that resulted in trading losses of about $10 billion. In more 
recent news, the catastrophic failure of Enron was partially caused by a fraudulent hedge 
transaction utilizing an OTC option. Through a company he controlled, Andrew S. Fastow 
sold worthless options to Enron making it appear that the value of Enron’s investment in 
Avici Systems, Inc. was hedged. Fastow pocketed the premium for the bogus options while 
Enron appeared to have established a hedge position, protecting the value of their 
investment. Other notable failures related to exchange-traded derivatives include Barings 
PLC, the 223-year-old London merchant bank that helped finance the Louisiana Purchase, 
and the Canadian Pacific Railway, which collapsed as a result of hidden derivatives losses.  
 
Derivatives trading is risky business. But a lack of adequate internal controls led to many of 
the losses mentioned above. Internal controls must be airtight in a firm that engages in 
hedging or trading activities using exchange-traded or OTC derivatives. Insufficient market 
and product knowledge was also a major factor in these financial debacles.  
 



:


commod futur exchangetrad option and otc option
there have been numer fraud involv commod futur exchangetrad option
and otc option in decemb 1994 orang counti california becam the largest
municip ever to file for bankruptci thi wa larg caus by riski invest
secur fraud financi transact
11526 2011 fraud examin manual
strategi util otc option that result in trade loss of about 10 billion in more
recent new the catastroph failur of enron wa partial caus by a fraudul hedg
transact util an otc option through a compani he control andrew s fastow
sold worthless option to enron make it appear that the valu of enron invest in
avici system inc wa hedg fastow pocket the premium for the bogu option while
enron appear to have establish a hedg posit protect the valu of their
invest other notabl failur relat to exchangetrad deriv includ bare
plc the 223yearold london merchant bank that help financ the louisiana purchas
and the canadian pacif railwai which collaps as a result of hidden deriv loss
deriv trade is riski busi but a lack of adequ intern control led to mani of
the loss mention abov intern control must be airtight in a firm that engag in
hedg or trade activ us exchangetrad or otc deriv insuffici market
and product knowledg wa also a major factor in these financi debacl
