2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Block Order Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Block Order Schemes 
When several different accounts are combined on the same order it is called a block order. 
For example, a broker may wish to execute the same buy order for 10 of his customers. To 
accomplish this he may write an order ticket such as: “For account 12345 and others, buy 
100 contracts of December cattle at the market.” The justification for this type of order is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1538                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that time is of the essence. If the market is volatile, customers will need their order executed 
as quickly as possible. Writing 10 separate order tickets for each account and calling the 
orders to the trading floor separately would take too much time. By combining all the orders 
on one ticket and providing one account number, time is saved and the other account 
numbers and quantities can be added to the order ticket when the executed order (fill) is 
reported back to the broker. 
 
The potential for abuse is obvious. Prices move rapidly in volatile markets and the accounts 
the order has been executed for have not all been made known. The time from when the 
block order is placed and when the fill is reported back to the broker can take many minutes. 
On some busy days it can take an hour or more. During this time the market is moving and 
the executed order will either be in a loss or gain position by the time it is reported back. 
This is where fraud can occur. 
 
For example, assume that 100 contracts of December cattle were bought at 80.00 (cents per 
pound) and that when the fill is reported thirty minutes later the market is at 81.00. This 
favorable change in market price (100 points) is equivalent to $400 profit per contract or 
$40,000 profit for the entire order. The broker then gives out the “other” account numbers 
to the floor clerk to complete the order with 55 contracts going to a favored account and 5 
contracts going to the other nine accounts. The broker then immediately sells 55 December 
cattle contracts for the favored account realizing a $22,000 profit. Of course, if the market 
had moved lower by the time the fill was reported the favored account would not have been 
added to the order or the loss taken would have been minimal.  
 
Proving such a scheme is easy. The CFE will need to obtain 1) the monthly brokerage recap 
of the salesman, 2) copies of all order tickets written by the salesman for the time period in 
question (brokerages must keep the hard copies for several years), 3) a copy of the telephone 
audio recording of the placement of the order and reported fill from the trading floor (all 
calls to the trading floor are recorded and archived), and 4) copies of the “daily equity 
statements” provided to the salesman by the brokerage firm detailing account numbers, 
account names, open positions and the cash value of all accounts represented by the 
salesman. A block order scheme will easily be detected by analyzing this information. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1539 



:


block order scheme
when sever differ account ar combin on the same order it is call a block order
for exampl a broker mai wish to execut the same bui order for 10 of hi custom to
accomplish thi he mai write an order ticket such as for account 12345 and other bui
100 contract of decemb cattl at the market the justif for thi type of order is
secur fraud financi transact
11538 2011 fraud examin manual
that time is of the essenc if the market is volatil custom will need their order execut
as quickli as possibl write 10 separ order ticket for each account and call the
order to the trade floor separ would take too much time by combin all the order
on on ticket and provid on account number time is save and the other account
number and quantiti can be ad to the order ticket when the execut order fill is
report back to the broker
the potenti for abus is obviou price move rapidli in volatil market and the account
the order ha been execut for have not all been made known the time from when the
block order is place and when the fill is report back to the broker can take mani minut
on some busi dai it can take an hour or more dure thi time the market is move and
the execut order will either be in a loss or gain posit by the time it is report back
thi is where fraud can occur
for exampl assum that 100 contract of decemb cattl were bought at 8000 cent per
pound and that when the fill is report thirti minut later the market is at 8100 thi
favor chang in market price 100 point is equival to 400 profit per contract or
40000 profit for the entir order the broker then give out the other account number
to the floor clerk to complet the order with 55 contract go to a favor account and 5
contract go to the other nine account the broker then immedi sell 55 decemb
cattl contract for the favor account realiz a 22000 profit of cours if the market
had move lower by the time the fill wa report the favor account would not have been
ad to the order or the loss taken would have been minim
prove such a scheme is easi the cfe will need to obtain 1 the monthli brokerag recap
of the salesman 2 copi of all order ticket written by the salesman for the time period in
question brokerag must keep the hard copi for sever year 3 a copi of the telephon
audio record of the placement of the order and report fill from the trade floor all
call to the trade floor ar record and archiv and 4 copi of the daili equiti
statement provid to the salesman by the brokerag firm detail account number
account name open posit and the cash valu of all account repres by the
salesman a block order scheme will easili be detect by analyz thi inform
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11539
