2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/The False Sale


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


The False Sale 
In many cases, corrupt employees utilize outside accomplices to help steal inventory. The 
fake sale is one method that depends upon an accomplice. Like most inventory thefts, the 
fake sale is not complicated. The accomplice of the employee-fraudster pretends to buy 
merchandise, but the employee does not ring up the sale. The accomplice takes the 
merchandise without paying for it. To a casual observer, it will appear that the transaction is 
a normal sale. The employee bags the merchandise, and may act as though a transaction is 
being entered on the register, but in fact, the “sale” is not recorded. The accomplice may 
even pass a nominal amount of money to the employee to complete the illusion. A related 
scheme occurs when an employee sells merchandise to an accomplice at an unauthorized 
discount.  
 
Employees also sometimes enlist accomplices to return goods that the employee has already 
stolen. This is an easy way for the employee to convert the stolen inventory into cash. 
 



:


the fals sale
in mani case corrupt employe util outsid accomplic to help steal inventori the
fake sale is on method that depend upon an accomplic like most inventori theft the
fake sale is not complic the accomplic of the employeefraudst pretend to bui
merchandis but the employe doe not ring up the sale the accomplic take the
merchandis without pai for it to a casual observ it will appear that the transact is
a normal sale the employe bag the merchandis and mai act as though a transact is
be enter on the regist but in fact the sale is not record the accomplic mai
even pass a nomin amount of monei to the employe to complet the illus a relat
scheme occur when an employe sell merchandis to an accomplic at an unauthor
discount
employe also sometim enlist accomplic to return good that the employe ha alreadi
stolen thi is an easi wai for the employe to convert the stolen inventori into cash
