2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/Asset Requisitions and Transfers


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Asset Requisitions and Transfers 
Asset requisitions and other documents that allow non-cash assets to be moved from one 
location in a company to another can be used to facilitate the theft of those assets. 
Employees use internal transfer paperwork to gain access to merchandise that they otherwise 
might not be able to handle without raising suspicion. These documents do not account for 
missing merchandise the way false sales do, but they allow a person to move the assets from 
one location to another. In the process of this movement, the thief steals the merchandise. 
 
The most basic scheme occurs when an employee requisitions materials for some work-
 related project, then makes off with the materials. In some cases the employee simply 
overstates the amount of supplies or equipment it will take to complete his work and pilfers 
the excess. In more ambitious schemes the employee might invent a completely fictitious 
project that necessitates the use of certain assets he intends to steal.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.606                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An employee of a telecommunications company used false project documents to request 
approximately $100,000 worth of computer chips, allegedly to upgrade company 
computers. Knowing that this type of requisiti on required verbal authorization from another 
source, the employee set up an elaborate phone scheme to get the “project” approved. The 
fraudster used his knowledge of the company’s phone system to forward calls from four 
different lines to his own desk. When the confirmation call was made, it was the 
perpetrator who answered the phone and authorized the project.  
 
Dishonest employees sometimes falsify asset transfer forms so they can remove inventory 
from a warehouse or stockroom. The false documents allow the employee to remove 
merchandise from the warehouse, but instead of using it for a work-related purpose, the 
perpetrator simply takes it home. The obvious problem with this type of scheme is that the 
person who orders the merchandise will usually be the primary suspect when it turns  
up missing.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager requested merchandise from the company warehouse to be displayed on a 
showroom floor. The pieces he re quested never made it to the showroom, because he loaded 
them into a pickup truck and took them home. In some instances he actually took the 
items in broad daylight and with the help of  another employee. This individual thought he 
was immune from detection because the merchandise was requested via computer using a 
management level security code. The code was not specific to any one manager, so there 
would be no way of knowing which manager had ordered the merchandise. Unfortunately 
for the thief, the company was able to record the computer terminal from which the request 
originated. The manager had used  his own computer to make the request, which led to his 
undoing. 
 



:


asset requisit and transfer
asset requisit and other document that allow noncash asset to be move from on
locat in a compani to anoth can be us to facilit the theft of those asset
employe us intern transfer paperwork to gain access to merchandis that thei otherwis
might not be abl to handl without rais suspicion these document do not account for
miss merchandis the wai fals sale do but thei allow a person to move the asset from
on locat to anoth in the process of thi movement the thief steal the merchandis
the most basic scheme occur when an employe requisit materi for some work
relat project then make off with the materi in some case the employe simpli
overst the amount of suppli or equip it will take to complet hi work and pilfer
the excess in more ambiti scheme the employe might invent a complet fictiti
project that necessit the us of certain asset he intend to steal
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1606 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an employe of a telecommun compani us fals project document to request
approxim 100000 worth of comput chip allegedli to upgrad compani
comput know that thi type of requis on requir verbal author from anoth
sourc the employe set up an elabor phone scheme to get the project approv the
fraudster us hi knowledg of the compani phone system to forward call from four
differ line to hi own desk when the confirm call wa made it wa the
perpetr who answer the phone and author the project
dishonest employe sometim falsifi asset transfer form so thei can remov inventori
from a warehous or stockroom the fals document allow the employe to remov
merchandis from the warehous but instead of us it for a workrel purpos the
perpetr simpli take it home the obviou problem with thi type of scheme is that the
person who order the merchandis will usual be the primari suspect when it turn
up miss
exampl
a manag request merchandis from the compani warehous to be displai on a
showroom floor the piec he re quest never made it to the showroom becaus he load
them into a pickup truck and took them home in some instanc he actual took the
item in broad daylight and with the help of anoth employe thi individu thought he
wa immun from detect becaus the merchandis wa request via comput us a
manag level secur code the code wa not specif to ani on manag so there
would be no wai of know which manag had order the merchandis unfortun
for the thief the compani wa abl to record the comput termin from which the request
origin the manag had us hi own comput to make the request which led to hi
undo
