2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/Falsifying Incoming Shipments


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Falsifying Incoming Shipments 
One of the most common examples of an employee abusing the purchasing and receiving 
functions occurs when a person charged with receiving goods on behalf of the victim 
company—such as a warehouse supervisor or receiving clerk—falsifies the records of 
incoming shipments. If, for example, 1,000 units of a particular item are received, the 
perpetrator indicates that only 900 were received. By marking the shipment short, the 
perpetrator can steal the 100 units that are unaccounted for.  
 
The obvious problem with this kind of scheme is the fact that the receiving report does not 
match the vendor’s invoice, which will likely ca use a problem with payment. In the example 
above, if the vendor bills for 1,000 units but the accounts payable voucher only shows 
receipt of 900 units of merchandise, then someone will have to explain where the extra 100 
units went.  
 
Some employees avoid this problem by altering only one copy of the receiving report. The 
copy that is sent to accounts payable indicates receipt of a full shipment so the vendor will 
be paid without any questions. The copy used for inventory records indicates a short 
shipment so that the assets on hand will equal the assets in the perpetual inventory.  
 
Instead of marking shipments short, the perpetrator might reject portions of a shipment as 
not being up to quality specifications. The perpetrator then keeps the “substandard” 
merchandise rather than sending it back to the supplier. The result is the same as if the 
shipment had been marked short.  
 



:


falsifi incom shipment
on of the most common exampl of an employe abus the purchas and receiv
function occur when a person charg with receiv good on behalf of the victim
companysuch as a warehous supervisor or receiv clerkfalsifi the record of
incom shipment if for exampl 1000 unit of a particular item ar receiv the
perpetr indic that onli 900 were receiv by mark the shipment short the
perpetr can steal the 100 unit that ar unaccount for
the obviou problem with thi kind of scheme is the fact that the receiv report doe not
match the vendor invoic which will like ca us a problem with payment in the exampl
abov if the vendor bill for 1000 unit but the account payabl voucher onli show
receipt of 900 unit of merchandis then someon will have to explain where the extra 100
unit went
some employe avoid thi problem by alter onli on copi of the receiv report the
copi that is sent to account payabl indic receipt of a full shipment so the vendor will
be paid without ani question the copi us for inventori record indic a short
shipment so that the asset on hand will equal the asset in the perpetu inventori
instead of mark shipment short the perpetr might reject portion of a shipment as
not be up to qualiti specif the perpetr then keep the substandard
merchandis rather than send it back to the supplier the result is the same as if the
shipment had been mark short
