2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/Concealing Inventory Shrinkage


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Concealing Inventory Shrinkage 
When inventory is stolen, the key concealment issue for the perpetrator is shrinkage. Inventory 
shrinkage  is the unaccounted-for reduction in the company’s inventory that results from theft. 
For instance, assume a computer retailer has 1,000 computers in stock. After work one day, 
an employee loads 10 computers into a truck and takes them home. Now the company only 
has 990 computers, but since there is no record that the employee took 10 computers, the 
inventory records still show 1,000 units on hand. The company has experienced inventory 
shrinkage in the amount of 10 computers.  
 
Shrinkage is one of the red flags that signal fraud. The goal of the perpetrator is to proceed 
with his scheme undetected, so it is in his best interest to prevent anyone from looking for 
missing assets. This means concealing the shrinkage that occurs from asset theft. 
 
Inventory and other assets are typically tracked through a two-step process. The first step, 
the perpetual inventory, is a running count that records how much inventory should be on 
hand. When new shipments of merchandise are received, for instance, this merchandise is 
entered into the perpetual inventory. Similarly, when goods are sold they are removed from 
the perpetual inventory records. In this way a company tracks its inventory on a day-to-day 
basis.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.611 
Periodically, a physical count of assets on hand should be made. In this process, someone 
actually goes through the storeroom or warehouse and counts everything that the company 
has in stock. This total is then matched to the amount of assets reflected in the perpetual 
inventory. A variation between the physical inventory and the perpetual inventory totals is 
shrinkage. While a certain amount of shrinkage may be expected in any business, large 
shrinkage totals may indicate fraud.  
 



:


conceal inventori shrinkag
when inventori is stolen the kei conceal issu for the perpetr is shrinkag inventori
shrinkag is the unaccountedfor reduct in the compani inventori that result from theft
for instanc assum a comput retail ha 1000 comput in stock after work on dai
an employe load 10 comput into a truck and take them home now the compani onli
ha 990 comput but sinc there is no record that the employe took 10 comput the
inventori record still show 1000 unit on hand the compani ha experienc inventori
shrinkag in the amount of 10 comput
shrinkag is on of the red flag that signal fraud the goal of the perpetr is to proce
with hi scheme undetect so it is in hi best interest to prevent anyon from look for
miss asset thi mean conceal the shrinkag that occur from asset theft
inventori and other asset ar typic track through a twostep process the first step
the perpetu inventori is a run count that record how much inventori should be on
hand when new shipment of merchandis ar receiv for instanc thi merchandis is
enter into the perpetu inventori similarli when good ar sold thei ar remov from
the perpetu inventori record in thi wai a compani track it inventori on a daytodai
basi
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1611
period a physic count of asset on hand should be made in thi process someon
actual goe through the storeroom or warehous and count everyth that the compani
ha in stock thi total is then match to the amount of asset reflect in the perpetu
inventori a variat between the physic inventori and the perpetu inventori total is
shrinkag while a certain amount of shrinkag mai be expect in ani busi larg
shrinkag total mai indic fraud
