2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/Altered Inventory Records


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Altered Inventory Records 
One of the simplest methods for concealing shrinkage is to change the perpetual inventory 
record so that it will match the physical inventory count. This is also known as a forced 
reconciliation of the account. The perpetrator simply changes the numbers in the perpetual 
inventory to make them match the amount of inventory on hand. For example, the 
employee might credit the perpetual inventory and debit the cost of sales account to bring 
the perpetual inventory numbers into line with the actual inventory count. Instead of using 
correcting entries to adjust the perpetual inventory, some employees simply delete or cover 
up the correct totals and enter new numbers. 
 
There are two sides to the inventory equation: the perpetual inventory and the physical 
inventory. Instead of altering the perpetual inventory, a perpetrator who has access to the 
records from a physical inventory count can change those records to match the perpetual 
inventory. Returning to the computer store example, assume the company counts its 
inventory every month and matches it to the perpetual inventory. The physical count should 
come to 990 computers, since that is what is actually on hand. If the perpetrator is someone 
charged with counting inventory, he can simply write down that there are 1,000 units  
on hand. 
 



:


alter inventori record
on of the simplest method for conceal shrinkag is to chang the perpetu inventori
record so that it will match the physic inventori count thi is also known as a forc
reconcili of the account the perpetr simpli chang the number in the perpetu
inventori to make them match the amount of inventori on hand for exampl the
employe might credit the perpetu inventori and debit the cost of sale account to bring
the perpetu inventori number into line with the actual inventori count instead of us
correct entri to adjust the perpetu inventori some employe simpli delet or cover
up the correct total and enter new number
there ar two side to the inventori equat the perpetu inventori and the physic
inventori instead of alter the perpetu inventori a perpetr who ha access to the
record from a physic inventori count can chang those record to match the perpetu
inventori return to the comput store exampl assum the compani count it
inventori everi month and match it to the perpetu inventori the physic count should
come to 990 comput sinc that is what is actual on hand if the perpetr is someon
charg with count inventori he can simpli write down that there ar 1000 unit
on hand
