2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
 
Much of our understanding of human behavior ca n be attributed to B.F. Skinner, described 
by many as one of the greatest social scientists of the twentieth century. Skinner promised 
that he would revolutionize not just psychology, but all of human society with his theories of 
behaviorism. According to Skinner, human behavior should be approached scientifically. 
Instead of worrying over men’s souls or quibbling about what makes up the Self, 
behaviorists would deal with what people actually do. By analyzing people’s actions, the 
behaviorist could then alter or direct any behavior for the greater good of all. Criminal 
behavior could be modified into productive action; rearing a family would cease to be a 
continual game of trial and error — the pitfalls would be replaced by basic behavioral 
principles. 
 
Skinner’s accomplishments may have fallen short of this lofty goal. But while he’s not as 
widely recognized as Sigmund Freud, Skinner’s influence permeates many areas, often 
without being overtly attributed to the methods Skinner proposed in Walden Two  (1948) and 
Science and Human Behavior  (1953). When lawyers argue the mitigating or exonerating 
circumstances of a client’s case, they often use behaviorist ideas; entire theories of 
management rest on the assumption that incentives and promotion are not just the best way to 
sell something; they’re the best way to  ensure that employees work properly. 
 
 
Behavioral Analysis and the Detection of Fraud 
When a detective searches for a suspect’s motive, the detective is using behaviorist methods 
of analysis. The suspect, it is assumed, was stimulated by some arrangement of factors. Many 
courses in criminology are built around the fundamental premise that crimes are particular 
sorts of behavior and best understood as the product of operant conditioning. Fraud 
examiners often use the same methods in approaching a case. When money is missing, the 
examiner traces the known flow of funds and then asks, “Who had the opportunity and the 
motive to get at this money?” Even without being conscious of the fact, the examiner is 
performing a behaviorist analysis on the crime. 
 
Ultimately, the question of fraud and behavior comes down to this—what can we do about it?  
We know that people commit these crimes at an alarming rate. Incidents range from the 
clerk who skims a few hundred dollars off a business’s daily deposits, to multimillion-dollar 
scam artists who destroy entire organizations. There’s a world of difference between the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
skimming clerk and the scamming financial executive — so can we even analyze the two 
people within the same system of fraud? 
 
A fraud examiner working with behaviorist principles knows that the difference between 
crimes lies in the different behaviors. The man who plays million-dollar games with other 
people’s money is stimulated and reinforced by a distinct set of factors, and so too is the 
clerk who builds a family nest egg from his three-figure thefts. So when an examiner is asked 
to go beyond crime-solving and to consult on fraud prevention, the job demands a thorough 
analysis of behavior. 
 
It is important to think of employment as a system of behavior because so much fraud 
occurs in workplace environments, and because such thinking highlights the connection 
between economics and people’s actions. For both the crook and the dedicated worker, 
money exerts a powerful influence, and this is not likely to change. The resourceful 
employer, then, should consider the best way to establish a positive set of relations between 
employees and the funds flowing through the company. The more rigorously we understand 
how people behave, the better equipped we are to change the way they behave. 
 
Behavioral studies such as those conducted by Skinner show that punishment is the least 
effective method of changing behavior. Punishing brings “a temporary suppression of the 
behavior,” but only with constant supervision and application. In repeated experiments, 
Skinner found that punishment — either applying a negative stimulus, or taking away a 
positive one — effectively extinguished a subject’s behavior, but that the behavior returned 
“when the punishment was discontinued... and eventually all responses came out” again. 
The subject would suppress the behavior as long as the punishment was applied directly and 
continually, but as soon as the punishment was withdrawn for a while, the behavior was 
attempted again; if there was no punishment following the attempt, the subject began to 
behave as before.  
 
Behaviorally, reinforcement and punishment are distinguished by the ways that positive and 
negative forces are applied. A positive reinforcement presents a positive stimulus in exchange for 
the desired response. Fathers say to their sons, “You’ve cleaned your room. Good. Here’s 
the key to the car.” The behavior (cleaning) is given in return for the car. A negative 
reinforcement, on the other hand, withdraws a negative stimulus in exchange for the response. 
So the father says, “I’ll stop hassling you if you clean this room.” The negative (hassling) is 
withdrawn when the appropriate behavior is performed.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.103  
Reinforcing and Punishing 
REINFORCEMENT Presents positive stimuli Withdraws negative stimuli 
PUNISHMENT Presents negative stimuli Withdraws positive stimuli 
 
In an act of punishment, the polarities, so to speak, are reversed. Faced with an undesired 
behavior, the punisher presents a negative stimulus. A father, hearing his son tell a 
particularly raunchy story, puts a bar of soap into the boy’s mouth. Punishment may also be 
administered by withdrawing a positive stimulus. “Your room is still filthy,” the father tells 
his languid child, “so you can’t use the car.” The boy suffers from thwarted desire.  
 
Punishment fights a losing battle in manipulating behavior because it works by providing 
negative consequences—administering unpleasantries and taking away desirables. A car or 
the thrill of a racy story doesn’t become less attractive for its use in punishment; its power to 
stimulate is simply squelched. Reinforcement, on the other hand, proceeds, like the old song, 
to “accentuate the positive.” Skinner concludes that  behavior is most effectively modified by 
managing and modifying desires through reinforcement; he wants to replace destructive 
behaviors with productive ones, instead of trying to punish an already existing impulse. 
 
Behaviorism points toward a number of alternatives to punishment. Chief among these is to 
modify the circumstances  surrounding the act. If an employee is experiencing financial problems, 
there may be ways a company can help alleviate pressures through credit counseling, pay 
advances, or low-interest loans, thereby alleviating financial difficulties without the employee 
resorting to fraud. In other instances, employees engage in fraud because they feel underpaid 
or unappreciated.  
 
Emotions, according to Skinner, are a predisposition for people’s actions. Anger is not itself 
a behavior, but a state of being that predisposes people to do things like yell or fight. Anger 
is a part of a person’s response, to the extent that an angry man is more likely to get in a 
shouting match with his friends. And since the emotional associations of any event are 
important factors in conditioning behavior, the associations can be manipulated in 
conditioning the behavior. That’s why advertisers use cute babies to sell toilet paper—the 
image associates the toilet paper with the emotions evoked by the baby. A company portrays 
its founder as a father figure for a similar reason. When managers are faced with disgruntled 
employees, they can modify these emotional circumstances, not just with “image” work, but 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
with adequate compensation and recognition of workers’ accomplishments. Incentive 
programs and task-related bonuses follow this principle, assuming that employees who feel 
challenged and rewarded by their jobs will produce more work at a higher quality, and are 
less likely to violate the law. 
 
Another non-punitive approach drives the undesirable behavior into extinction by 
preventing the expected response. This is a specialized version of modifying the 
circumstances. Businesses perform an extinction strategy by implementing a system of 
internal controls. In requiring several signatures for a transaction, for example, a bank 
prevents any one employee from gaining access to money. This approach doesn’t involve 
reinforcements or punitive measures; it simply modifies the structure in which acts take 
place. The perception of internal controls provides a particularly strong deterrent to fraud 
because it obstructs the operant behavior that has heretofore been linked with positive 
reinforcement. We prevent the act by blocking the expected response. Criminal behavior is 
discouraged because crime doesn’t pay. 
 
A related strategy overcomes improper behavior by encouraging the behavior’s “opposite.” 
Skinner says we can condition incompatible behavior  that interferes with the person’s usual acts. 
Instead of punishing a child’s emotional tantrums, for example, the behaviorist rewards the 
child for controlling emotional outbursts; we drive the tantrums into extinction by not 
responding, and reinforce the stoical behavior. A destructive behavior is offset by an 
incompatible productive one. Since fraud involves dishonesty, secretiveness, and antagonistic 
behaviors, the astute manager finds ways to reward the opposite behaviors — honesty, 
openness, and cooperation.  
 
Of course, it’s easier to list these strategies in a few paragraphs than it is to implement them. 
Even the most seemingly simple acts can become tangled as people and circumstances 
interact. A perfectly sound theoretical reinforcement—an employee incentive program, 
perhaps—may be viewed with suspicion by disgruntled workers. Behavioral modification is 
never easy, Skinner says; reinforcements “must  be sensitive and complex” because people’s 
lives are complicated and their behaviors sensitized. For example, people in groups often 
interact in alarming and unstable ways. Skinner demonstrates this tendency with the example 
of a whipping-boy game played by eighteenth-century sailors. The sailors tied up a group of 
young boys in a straight line, restraining each boy’s left hand and placing a whip in the right 
hand. The first boy in line was given a light blow on the back and told to do the same to the 
person immediately in front of him. Each boy hit the next in line, and each one was hit in 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.105  
turn. As Skinner reports, “It was clearly in the interest of the group that all blows be gentle, 
[but] the inevitable result was a furious lashing.” 1 Each boy in the line hit a little harder than 
he had been hit himself; so after a few cycles, the last blows would, in fact, be furious 
(especially since each swing was preceded by pain, creating an emotional disposition of anger 
and anxiety). Whipping sessions aren’t a likely happening in most companies, but people 
often exhibit a similar inclination toward catalyzed reactions: whispering sessions gradually 
evolve into full-blown discussions that echo into the hallways; minor financial indiscretions 
grow into large-scale larceny.2 
 
Ideally, behavioral managers could anticipate this catalyzing and redirect the energies, but 
what if that is not an option? Though the do llar amounts (and the audacity) of some white-
 collar crimes boggle the average observer’s mind, the crime remains an act of behavior and 
thus should be approachable by the same method used to analyze a $4,500 credit card fraud. 
The perpetrator may be described as “obse ssive” and “megalomaniacal,” but he is still 
behaving in a network of actions, with his behavior subject to operant conditioning.  
 
The dollar amounts are in fact misleading. Once the stakes reach a certain level, it’s not even 
plausible to look for explanations involving a lack of respect or appreciation. Wheeler-dealers 
and armchair analysts often aver that “It’s not really the money,” and they’re right. 
High-dollar criminals describe their machinations as a “kick” or thrill; they feel like they’re 
playing a game, and it’s the game of their lives. Behaviorists agree. Money is a “generalized 
reinforcer,” linked with many positive factors  directly and often taking on a symbolic power 
of its own, thereby yielding a condition of strength. Skinner says, “We are automatically 
reinforced, apart from any particular deprivation, when we successfully control the physical 
world.” 3 So we need not be starving in order to act, especially with the sense of control —
symbolic and literal — gained by acquiring money. Game-playing exerts something similar on 
its participants; someone who manipulates a chess board or a deck of cards successfully 
gains a sense of strength over external events. We can play the game “for its own sake” 
because it yields the impression of strength. Imagine, then, the behavioral stroke that 
happens when the game’s power is combined with the power of money as a generalized 
reinforcer, and both of these factors are played out with real people and settings. The 
                                                 
1 Skinner, B.F. Science and Human Behavior. Macmillan Publishing: New York, 1953. p. 309. 
2 Compare the excuse “Everybody does it.” It’s often tr ue that an impressive number of other people in the 
perpetrator’s peer group were themselves breaking the law, a condition catalyzed by intense interaction and 
resulting in more serious crimes. 
3 Skinner, p. 77. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
dealmaker is racing through a thicket of reinforcements, and the greater the risk—financial, 
legal, or personal—the greater the thrill. The stimulus isn’t the money as a thing in itself, any 
more than money for its own sake prompts the miser. In either case, the condition of 
strength (we might even call it “power”) feeds the behaving person; money just happens to 
be the reinforcer par excellence of our culture.  
 
Dealing with high-stakes criminals will remain difficult, despite our understanding of their 
behavior. Not just because the amounts of money and the networks of action are so 
complex, but because the conditioning is so intense. How, for example, can you replace the 
kick of scoring a $35-million-dollar take in a three-day scam? Can a career con be prompted 
to give up the deceitful practices that have marked his experience? Finding genuine and 
specific answers may be delayed for some time, but they will likely follow the same pattern 
we’ve discussed with other crimes:  
• Modifying the circumstances of the behavior by, for example, making legitimate 
businesses a more opportune place for daring and innovative techniques  
• Extinguishing the criminal behavior by preventing its success using regulation, controls, 
and supervision  
• Encouraging behaviors incompatible with criminal activity, through educational practices 
and demonstrating “values” that call the criminal lifestyle, however flashy, into question  
 
The specific measures will be particular to the crime. The actions dictate the response. But 
whether we’re dealing with a working mother’s credit card fraud, or Bernie Madoff’s palatial 
schemes, our methods can be behavioral. Fraud examiners may never eradicate crime 
completely, but by approaching criminal acts scientifically, we can become more successful 
in anticipating and preventing the acts.  
 
Conclusion 
To successfully recognize, detect, and prevent fraud, the examiner has to take into account 
as many variables as possible, and has to learn a great deal about how human beings—as 
individuals and in groups—behave.  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.107  
All the efforts of behavioral engineering notwithstanding, the question of behavior finally 
rests with the person who behaves. In Walden Two, the founder of Skinner’s utopian 
community admits that there is only so much that can be done by cultural design:  
 
You can’t foresee all future circumstances, and you can’t specify adequate future conduct. 
You don’t know what will be required. Instea d, you have to set up certain behavioral 
processes which will lead the individual to design his own “good” conduct when the time 
comes. We call that sort of thing “self-control.” 4  
 
No substitute exists for the conscious individual making a choice to act. And no science can 
predict or shape behavior with pure accuracy. There are just too many factors at work in the 
network of actions. However, self-control is a behavior that is guided by conditioning in the 
same way any other act would be.  
 
It does little good, for example, to tell an alcoholic “Stop drinking; control yourself.” The 
command alone has little force, even if the alcoholic wants to stop drinking. Family 
members can suggest that the man simply throw away his bottles, but “the principal 
problem,” Skinner interjects, “is to get him to do it.” 5 The family can, however, help 
condition the alcoholic’s self-control by regis tering disapproval of drinking, by reinforcing 
the man’s successful resistance to drink, and by encouraging the man to do things 
incompatible with a drinking life. They can’t fo llow the man through every step of his life; he 
has to resist the impulse to sneak a sip on his own. But the behavior of resistance is 
strengthened by his family members’ intervention.  “Self-control” as a behavior is shaped by 
“variables in the environment and the history of the individual.” 6 
 
Understanding why people do certain things allows us to go beyond a simplistic insistence 
that criminals “control themselves.” We will in stead have to consider how this control can 
be conditioned, preventing the behavior directly when possible, but ultimately relying on 
each individual having adequately absorbed the principles of self-control. 
 
                                                 
4 Id. at p. 96. 
5 Id. at p. 240. 
6 Ibid. Family members in this type of situation often ask the alcoholic “Don’t you see what you’re doing?” The 
answer may sometimes be “No,” because self-knowledge is  a discriminative behavior—an act of cognition that 
labels and organizes information. As a behavior, self-knowledge is of course influenced by conditioning; we 
recognize or “know” what we’ve been conditioned to  know. Thus, treatment programs often encourage 
patients to reflect on their behavior in certain ways, conditioning a self-knowledge that will contribute to self-
 control. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Why People Obey the Law 
Now that we have a general understanding of at least some of the reasons why humans 
behave the way they do, let us turn our discussion to why people obey (and contrarily break) 
the law. In his book Why People Obey the Law, Tom Tyler studies the two principal types of 
law-abiding people. 
 
Obviously, some people choose to obey the la w while others choose to break it. Many 
otherwise law-abiding members of society evade taxes, occasionally use a controlled 
substance, commit fraud, or even drive under the influence of alcohol. According to studies 
by Tyler, the instrumental and the normative perspectives attempt to explain why some 
follow the law to the letter while others obey selectively. 
 
Instrumental Perspective  
According to this theory, people obey the law because they fear punishment. When 
reviewing the incarceration rates in this country, it is not difficult to discern that this is the 
perspective most adhered to by policymakers. 
 
A person of this belief might exceed the speed limit, thinking that the benefit of saved time 
outweighs the risk of the potential speeding ticket. These types are unlikely to rob a bank, 
though, considering that success is doubtful and the penalty is steep. They weigh the pros 
and cons of compliance with the law and act accordingly. 
 
Normative Perspective 
The focus of this perspective is what one considers just and moral. When people believe 
compliance is their moral obligation, commitment to the law is voluntary, regardless of fear 
of punishment.  
 
People of this belief may indulge in illegal drugs but refrain from stealing; one being morally 
acceptable in their view and the other not. Others  may obey all laws out of the belief that the 
authorities are just. In any case, compliance is unforced and voluntary. 
 
Naturally, the authorities prefer voluntary compliance. From their point of view, the 
normative is preferable to the instrumental perspective since the former does not require 
                                                 
7 Tyler, Tom R. Why People Obey the Law. 1990. Yale University Press: New Haven. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.109  
enforcement. If the public already believes in the government’s moral right to govern, the 
authorities’ job is made much easier.  
 
Morality, however, can work against the government as it did with the U.S. public’s moral 
indignation over the Vietnam conflict, for instance. Those who viewed the government’s 
authority as legitimate supported the war, regardless of their own views as to its necessity. 
Others considered the ongoing struggle useless and wrong and opposed it. 
 
Another significant difference between the instrumental and the normative perspectives is 
whether one focuses on procedures rather than results. Those adhering to the normative 
point of view will, for example, be more concerned with being treated justly in court rather 
than with winning or losing their case. They will contentedly await judgment if dealt with 
fairly. People of this opinion are interested in neutrality, lack of bias, honesty, politeness, and 
respect for one’s rights. The “due process,” then, is most effective in promoting compliance 
to those of this view. The instrumentalist, on the other hand, focuses on the outcome of his 
case and is less concerned with procedures. In his mind, a procedure is fair if it is favorable. 
 
Legitimacy  
By definition, effective leadership must produce compliance with a leader’s decisions. 
However, it is sometimes the case that when new legislation or policy is introduced, public 
support and compliance do not occur. Supreme Court decisions, notably on school prayer, do 
not necessarily produce general public acceptance of or adherence to policy. Likewise, if a 
company introduces a new policy that no employee may take a gift (no matter how small) from 
a potential vendor, many employees will continue to take small gifts anyway. 
 
Altering citizens’ behavior by manipulating access to valued resources or threatening to 
impose sanctions is known as social control. Once again, the concept is that reward and 
punishment are what cause people to obey the law. People maximize their personal gain and 
comply based on deterrence. Of course, life is more complicated than reward and 
punishment. Otherwise, the job of law enforcement would be easy. But social control 
appeals to authorities. The public understands deterrence, rewards, and punishment. In 
contrast, emphasizing the normative approach places power not in authorities, but in the 
people whose voluntary compliance is sought. 
 
In studying general compliance with the law, sociologists have found that deterrence does 
not fully explain why people obey the law. Citizens choose to obey the law when the chances 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
of being caught violating it are virtually zero, as when one might come upon a stop sign in a 
deserted street. Almost all Americans pay their income taxes in a voluntary system, even 
though the chances of being caught shaving taxes owed are small. Yet citizens break the law 
when it is risky to do so, as when they buy illegal drugs or embezzle thousands of dollars 
from their company. 
 
In a democracy, the legal system cannot function if it can influence people only by 
manipulating rewards and costs. The resources required to enforce such a regime are too 
high. Deterrence is expensive to enforce and does not guarantee an adequate level of 
obedience. Drunk driving is a good example. Studies show that an extremely high 
investment of resources is needed to convince people that the likelihood of being caught and 
punished for driving drunk is high. Public campaigns against drunk driving tend to 
temporarily reduce the number of DUIs or DWIs. As long as citizens think the chances of 
being caught are rising, the incidences of drunk driving remain lower. However, as soon as 
public perception of increased vigilance against drunk driving lessens, the number of arrests 
goes up again. Likewise, as is discussed later  in the “Fraud Prevention Programs” chapter, 
increasing the perception of detection is a powerful anti-fraud program. If an employee 
thinks that his company is not paying attention to occupational fraud, then some employees 
are more likely to try to get away with it.  
 
Consider the use of marijuana, an illegal yet still popular drug. If the reason people abstain 
from using this drug is that they believe in complying with the law, then obviously in their 
eyes the authorities have legitimacy. However, if they forgo marijuana use because it violates 
their moral values, then it is their convictions that are the deciding factor. If fear of legal 
punishment stops them, then deterrence carries greater weight with them. And if they refrain 
out of fear of social ostracism, then the social group’s influence prevails. 
 
A person’s own normative values have the final say about appropriate behavior. Unlike the 
reward and punishment approach, one’s own values are what produce compliance or 
noncompliance with the law in the end. Psychologists refer to this as “internalized 
obligations,” for which citizens take personal responsibility. 
 
Voluntary Compliance 
Voluntary compliance matters only to the extent to which it produces obedience that goes 
beyond self-interest, measured by most of us by reward and punishment. A normative 
speeder, for instance, will accept being a few minutes late to his appointment in order to 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.111  
obey the speed limit, thus making the roads safer for everyone. A normative employee will 
accept a salary freeze and not steal from the company to make up for the raise he was 
promised. In other words, these people will act against their own best interests if they feel 
compliance with the rule is of greater moral import.  
 
Of course government authorities recognize that without the good will of the public, they 
could not function. Their aim must be to maximize compliance and minimize hostility 
toward laws, while gaining legitimacy in the eyes of the public. Any leader who wants to 
effectively govern must have legitimacy with his subordinates. The same is true for 
employers, managers, teachers, and army sergeants. Otherwise, compliance will not occur. 
 
Due to its significant social impact, social scientists and politicians have found legitimacy to 
be an issue of major concern. It is seen as a reservoir of loyalty from which leaders can draw. 
Opinion polls on the public’s attitude toward the law and the government are really about 
public confidence in the government’s legitimacy. If the public does not have confidence in 
the legal system, obedience to laws is unlikely. 
 
Studies show that both children and adults feel a strong obligation to obey the law. Whether 
we can attribute this to their normative values or the legitimacy of the authorities is the real 
question. Naturally, those who view the authorities as legitimate are more likely to comply. 
This leads to the conclusion that normative support of the system results in compliant 
behavior. 
 
Measuring Legitimacy and Compliance 
A study by Tyler (called the Chicago Study) focused on six laws with which people deal on a 
daily basis: disturbing the peace, littering, dr iving while intoxicated, speeding, shoplifting, and 
parking illegally. Participants were asked how often they had broken these laws in the past 
year. Most admitted to parking illegally (51 pe rcent) and speeding (62 percent), but very few 
admitted to shoplifting (3 percent). Twenty-seven percent confessed to disturbing the peace, 
25 percent to littering, and 19 percent admitted to having driven while under the influence. 
 
The second wave of interviews, in which participants were asked about a shorter time frame, 
produced similar results. To measure fear of punishment, respondents were asked how likely 
they thought it was that they would be arrested or issued a citation if they violated these six 
laws. Eighty-three percent thought it was likely they would be caught driving drunk; 78 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.112   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
percent thought the same for parking violations and shoplifting; 72 percent for speeding; 35 
percent for disturbing the peace; and 31 percent for littering. 
 
Participants were then gauged for peer approval. For shoplifting, 89 percent said that they 
thought that the five adults they know best would disapprove. Eighty-six percent said the 
same for drunk driving, as did 51 percent for littering, 52 percent for speeding, 44 percent 
for illegal parking, and 53 percent for disturbing the peace. 
  
The next question was designed to measure respondents’ morality. They were asked whether 
each offense was “wrong.” Almost every one of the participants felt that any violations of 
the six laws were wrong. Speeding came out as the least immoral and shoplifting the most, 
with 99 percent of participants considering it morally objectionable. 
 
One sees that citizens seem to view the breaking of laws as a violation of their personal 
morality. Interestingly, most believe the chances of getting caught are high. And since peer 
disapproval levels are relatively light, one can gather that the social group is the source of the 
least amount of pressure to obey laws. 
 
More than four out of five participants felt a person should obey the law “even if it goes 
against what they think is right.” Almost as many  respondents felt that disobeying the law is 
seldom justified and that obedience and respect for authority are the most important virtues 
children should learn. 
 
Legitimacy and Compliance 
Legitimacy is regarded as the essential ingredient in what gives governments and leaders 
authority. The idea is that if the authorities have legitimacy, the public will obey the law. 
Tyler’s Chicago Study, however, was designed to put this concept to the test. 
 
The study did show that legitimacy is related to compliance. Participants who attributed 
greater legitimacy to authorities were more likely to obey the law, for instance. This does not 
prove a causal relationship, though. The results of the study were analyzed to account for 
demographic and sociological factors. This “regression analysis” suggests that legitimacy has 
a significant effect on compliance, regardless of the other factors. 
 
Certainly, legitimacy’s impact on a person is in fluenced by his personal experiences with 
police and courts. A person who feels mistreated by the authorities is certainly less likely to 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.113  
have confidence in their legitimacy and therefore is less likely to obey laws. In such cases, 
peer approval seems to take on greater importance in those people’s thinking. One more 
interesting result was that those participants who considered themselves politically liberal 
were more likely than those who regarded themselves as moderate to base compliant 
behavior on feelings of legitimacy. 
 
Implications of the Chicago Study 
Authorities do not take compliance with the law for granted. They often find that occasional 
noncompliance must be tolerated. Sometimes noncompliance is so widespread that it casts 
doubt upon the effectiveness and validity of the law itself. Prohibition, for example, was 
widely and often openly violated before its repeal. The results of the study suggest that 
normative values are more influential upon compliance than the reward and punishment 
approach. This is consistent with Skinner’s behavioral theories discussed previously. 
 
Again, the study shows that people have a high level of normative commitment to abide by 
the law. Most participants felt that breaking the law was morally wrong and that laws 
should be obeyed even when one does not agree with them—the “my country, right or 
wrong” approach. Authorities who can tap into  and encourage those views will of course 
inspire compliance. Employees who have a strong sense of loyalty to their employer will 
not violate company policies because such acts would be a betrayal to the company. 
 
The Psychological Variables 
The Chicago Study was designed to gauge the gap between citizens’ concerns for favorable 
outcomes and procedural fairness. It also measures the extent to which fairness influences 
reactions to experience. The experience in question is of the everyday, average-citizen 
variety—the type of encounter most of us have  with authorities over relatively minor 
matters. Participants reported calling the police for a number of reasons: accidents, 
disturbances, suspicious activities, and crimes against property or violent crimes. The 
majority of callers felt it was important for the police to solve their problem, whether it was 
serious or not. 
 
Police response time was satisfactory to most respondents. Only 15 percent felt that the 
police did not respond quickly enough. Nearly 70 percent knew what actions the police had 
taken to solve the problem, and almost two-thirds of those said that the police settled the 
situation. The 43 percent who said that the police failed to solve their problem admitted that 
they did do everything they could. All in all, 71 percent said they were satisfied with the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
outcome of their call. Most respondents also  felt that they were treated quite well by the 
police. Eighty-six percent expressed overall satisfaction with their politeness, concern for 
their rights, propriety, attentiveness, honesty, and willingness to consider their opinions. 
 
Respondents who were stopped by the police naturally had less magnanimous feelings 
toward them. Still, 73 percent of those who received tickets for minor offenses considered 
the outcome fair, acknowledging that the ticket was deserved.  
 
Satisfaction levels of participants who had to go to court were similarly high: 80 percent 
considered their treatment fair. However, 36 percent stated that they believed the judge 
could have reached a better outcome. Overall, though, participants were content with these 
elements of our justice system. 
 
Legitimacy and Experience 
People will accept unfavorable rulings if they believe they were dealt with fairly. Thus, fair 
procedures can cushion the blow of an outcome that is to one’s disadvantage, without 
damaging the authorities’ legitimacy. Of course, fair procedures can only go so far. If fair 
procedures consistently produce unfavorable results, the fairness of the procedures 
themselves will come into question. 
 
People place importance on procedure for several reasons, the first of which is simplicity. 
Often, the result itself is difficult to classify as fair or unfair. People therefore focus on the 
steps that lead up to the outcome. Another reason such emphasis is placed on procedures is 
that, with as much religious and ethnic diversity that the United States has, people do not 
always concur on what is fair. Although most people may not necessarily agree upon the 
outcome, they are usually of one mind as to the justice of the procedures. 
 
The procedural aspects of the law and how the public perceives them must be of great 
importance to authorities. Of course, policymakers must have a good idea of what the public 
considers fair. If the public perceives a court’s legal actions as just, they will support the 
outcome although it might not be to their advantage. Plea bargaining, for example, is often 
justified based on outcome. But if the inconsistency in plea agreements is seen as unfair, 
support for the legal system will weaken. Likewise, no-fault insurance may make sense in 
economic terms, but may dilute the basic principle underlying our legal system: those 
individuals are responsible for their own actions. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.115  
The same is true in the corporate environment. Employees will often accept unpopular 
company policies if the employees feel that the policy is applied “fairly.” For instance, 
employees may be upset that the company provides only three paid sick days, but if the rule 
is applied to all employees in an equal manner, most employees will live with the policy. 
However, if some employees are allowed additional sick days and others are not, employees 
begin to resent the policy and the company. In other words, these employees feel they are 
being treated unfairly. 
 
The Meaning of Procedural Justice 
An important issue left unaddressed until now is how people decide which procedures are 
fair and which are not. Previous efforts to study this question have focused on control. Two 
areas of control with which people are generally concerned are: decision control  (control over 
the actual decisions made) and process control (control over the opportunity to state  
one’s case). 
 
To better illustrate, let us take the example of an attorney representing a client in court. 
While the client surrenders control of the case to his attorney, he may still seek to maintain 
as much control as he can through control of the process. According to the instrumental 
perspective, he will value the opportunity to testify only insofar as it helps to achieve a 
beneficial outcome to his case. Studies show, however, that most of us appreciate the chance 
to air our views, regardless of whether it influences the outcome or not. From this, one can 
conclude that process control has an independent impact on how one perceives fairness and 
whether one is satisfied with the outcome (one’s satisfaction with the outcome and one’s 
opinion of fair procedures depends largely on one’s degree of control). 
 
Again, one must ask what criteria people use to decide whether a procedure is fair. G.S. 
Leventhal proposed six standards for evaluating the fairness of a procedure:  
• Representativeness 
• Consistency 
• Suppression of bias 
• Accuracy 
• Correctability  
• Ethicality 
 
Representativeness  relates to those parties whose concerns are affected throughout the 
allocation process. Consistency  refers to the uniform and unbiased treatment of all of the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
affected parties. Suppression of bias  guarantees that those involved with the outcome have no 
personal, vested interest in the case. This also prohibits a participant’s reliance on previously 
formed opinions rather than just the evidence at hand, as when a juror convicts because he 
believes most defendants are guilty. Accuracy  refers to objective high quality. Correctability  
involves the checks and balances provided in the system, which allow unfair decisions to be 
corrected, such as the appeals process. Ethicality, of course, involves the degree to which 
procedures meet generally held ethical standards of fairness and morality. Torture, for 
instance, is a violation of ethicality, as it is a breach of basic moral codes. 
 
Studies measuring the importance of Leventhal’s six criteria show that people place the most 
importance on consistency. Accuracy, representativeness, and suppressing bias are also 
highly valued. 
 
Based on Tyler’s Chicago Study, the author’s hypothesis is that in encounters with the police, 
people are more concerned with fairness than with the policeman’s adherence to formal 
issues of rights (i.e., ethicality). In the courtroom, however, ethical standards and rights 
receive greater emphasis. 
 
People’s views on procedural fairness are affected  by two factors: background characteristics 
and prior views. Race, education, income, sex, age, and political views are the most 
important background characteristics. Those who are liberal and better educated will place 
the most emphasis on ethicality when deciding if a procedure is just. Minorities are more 
likely to focus on consistency and suppression of bias, though. Prior views, formed perhaps 
from past experiences, carry more weight than background characteristics. Any background 
characteristic is certain to be overridden by one’s prior views on a subject. 
 
Influence of Control on the Meaning of Procedural Justice 
The Chicago Study assessed process control by questioning respondents about how much 
opportunity they had to state their case or present their problem. Decision control was 
measured by asking how much influence participants had over the determinations made by 
the third party in control. Most participants fe lt they had a high (43 percent) to moderate (20 
percent) level of process control. In contrast, a number of participants felt they had little 
decision control (about half said “not much at all”).  
 
The Chicago Study thus leads one to conclude that process control judgments is the deciding 
factor when assessing procedural justice in terms of control. Process control judgments are 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.117  
also important in assessing how experience affects people’s evaluation of  procedural justice. 
Ergo, respondents are more concerned with their opportunities to speak out rather than 
their influence over the outcome. The belief of citizens that their views are being weighed 
and considered by the authorities and that the authorities are dealing fairly with them 
reinforces their belief in their own process and decision control. 
 
In the employment context, the study tends to support the idea that employees should be 
involved in the development of policies and procedures. Instead of just distributing a fraud 
policy or an ethics policy, send out a questionnaire asking employees for their ideas on how 
fraud and corruption can be prevented in the company. If employees feel they have some 
control over the rules, they will be more likely to obey and follow them. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.201  



:


understand human behavior
much of our understand of human behavior ca n be attribut to bf skinner describ
by mani as on of the greatest social scientist of the twentieth centuri skinner promis
that he would revolution not just psycholog but all of human societi with hi theori of
behavior accord to skinner human behavior should be approach scientif
instead of worri over men soul or quibbl about what make up the self
behaviorist would deal with what peopl actual do by analyz peopl action the
behaviorist could then alter or direct ani behavior for the greater good of all crimin
behavior could be modifi into product action rear a famili would ceas to be a
continu game of trial and error the pitfal would be replac by basic behavior
principl
skinner accomplish mai have fallen short of thi lofti goal but while he not as
wide recogn as sigmund freud skinner influenc permeat mani area often
without be overtli attribut to the method skinner propos in walden two 1948 and
scienc and human behavior 1953 when lawyer argu the mitig or exoner
circumst of a client case thei often us behaviorist idea entir theori of
manag rest on the assumpt that incent and promot ar not just the best wai to
sell someth theyr the best wai to ensur that employe work properli
behavior analysi and the detect of fraud
when a detect search for a suspect motiv the detect is us behaviorist method
of analysi the suspect it is assum wa stimul by some arrang of factor mani
cours in criminolog ar built around the fundament premis that crime ar particular
sort of behavior and best understood as the product of oper condit fraud
examin often us the same method in approach a case when monei is miss the
examin trace the known flow of fund and then ask who had the opportun and the
motiv to get at thi monei even without be consciou of the fact the examin is
perform a behaviorist analysi on the crime
ultim the question of fraud and behavior come down to thiswhat can we do about it
we know that peopl commit these crime at an alarm rate incid rang from the
clerk who skim a few hundr dollar off a businesss daili deposit to multimilliondollar
scam artist who destroi entir organ there a world of differ between the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4102 2011 fraud examin manual
skim clerk and the scam financi execut so can we even analyz the two
peopl within the same system of fraud
a fraud examin work with behaviorist principl know that the differ between
crime li in the differ behavior the man who plai milliondollar game with other
peopl monei is stimul and reinforc by a distinct set of factor and so too is the
clerk who build a famili nest egg from hi threefigur theft so when an examin is ask
to go beyond crimesolv and to consult on fraud prevent the job demand a thorough
analysi of behavior
it is import to think of employ as a system of behavior becaus so much fraud
occur in workplac environ and becaus such think highlight the connect
between econom and peopl action for both the crook and the dedic worker
monei exert a power influenc and thi is not like to chang the resourc
employ then should consid the best wai to establish a posit set of relat between
employe and the fund flow through the compani the more rigor we understand
how peopl behav the better equip we ar to chang the wai thei behav
behavior studi such as those conduct by skinner show that punish is the least
effect method of chang behavior punish bring a temporari suppress of the
behavior but onli with constant supervis and applic in repeat experi
skinner found that punish either appli a neg stimulu or take awai a
posit on effect extinguish a subject behavior but that the behavior return
when the punish wa discontinu and eventu all respons came out again
the subject would suppress the behavior as long as the punish wa appli directli and
continu but as soon as the punish wa withdrawn for a while the behavior wa
attempt again if there wa no punish follow the attempt the subject began to
behav as befor
behavior reinforc and punish ar distinguish by the wai that posit and
neg forc ar appli a posit reinforc present a posit stimulu in exchang for
the desir respons father sai to their son youv clean your room good here
the kei to the car the behavior clean is given in return for the car a neg
reinforc on the other hand withdraw a neg stimulu in exchang for the respons
so the father sai ill stop hassl you if you clean thi room the neg hassl is
withdrawn when the appropri behavior is perform
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4103
reinforc and punish
reinforc present posit stimuli withdraw neg stimuli
punish present neg stimuli withdraw posit stimuli
in an act of punish the polar so to speak ar revers face with an undesir
behavior the punish present a neg stimulu a father hear hi son tell a
particularli raunchi stori put a bar of soap into the boi mouth punish mai also be
administ by withdraw a posit stimulu your room is still filthi the father tell
hi languid child so you cant us the car the boi suffer from thwart desir
punish fight a lose battl in manipul behavior becaus it work by provid
neg consequencesadminist unpleasantri and take awai desir a car or
the thrill of a raci stori doesnt becom less attract for it us in punish it power to
stimul is simpli squelch reinforc on the other hand proce like the old song
to accentu the posit skinner conclud that behavior is most effect modifi by
manag and modifi desir through reinforc he want to replac destruct
behavior with product on instead of try to punish an alreadi exist impuls
behavior point toward a number of altern to punish chief among these is to
modifi the circumst surround the act if an employe is experienc financi problem
there mai be wai a compani can help allevi pressur through credit counsel pai
advanc or lowinterest loan therebi allevi financi difficulti without the employe
resort to fraud in other instanc employe engag in fraud becaus thei feel underpaid
or unappreci
emot accord to skinner ar a predisposit for peopl action anger is not itself
a behavior but a state of be that predispos peopl to do thing like yell or fight anger
is a part of a person respons to the extent that an angri man is more like to get in a
shout match with hi friend and sinc the emot associ of ani event ar
import factor in condit behavior the associ can be manipul in
condit the behavior that why advertis us cute babi to sell toilet paperth
imag associ the toilet paper with the emot evok by the babi a compani portrai
it founder as a father figur for a similar reason when manag ar face with disgruntl
employe thei can modifi these emot circumst not just with imag work but
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4104 2011 fraud examin manual
with adequ compens and recognit of worker accomplish incent
program and taskrel bonus follow thi principl assum that employe who feel
challeng and reward by their job will produc more work at a higher qualiti and ar
less like to violat the law
anoth nonpunit approach drive the undesir behavior into extinct by
prevent the expect respons thi is a special version of modifi the
circumst busi perform an extinct strategi by implement a system of
intern control in requir sever signatur for a transact for exampl a bank
prevent ani on employe from gain access to monei thi approach doesnt involv
reinforc or punit measur it simpli modifi the structur in which act take
place the percept of intern control provid a particularli strong deterr to fraud
becaus it obstruct the oper behavior that ha heretofor been link with posit
reinforc we prevent the act by block the expect respons crimin behavior is
discourag becaus crime doesnt pai
a relat strategi overcom improp behavior by encourag the behavior opposit
skinner sai we can condit incompat behavior that interfer with the person usual act
instead of punish a child emot tantrum for exampl the behaviorist reward the
child for control emot outburst we drive the tantrum into extinct by not
respond and reinforc the stoical behavior a destruct behavior is offset by an
incompat product on sinc fraud involv dishonesti secret and antagonist
behavior the astut manag find wai to reward the opposit behavior honesti
open and cooper
of cours it easier to list these strategi in a few paragraph than it is to implement them
even the most seemingli simpl act can becom tangl as peopl and circumst
interact a perfectli sound theoret reinforcementan employe incent program
perhapsmai be view with suspicion by disgruntl worker behavior modif is
never easi skinner sai reinforc must be sensit and complex becaus peopl
live ar complic and their behavior sensit for exampl peopl in group often
interact in alarm and unstabl wai skinner demonstr thi tendenc with the exampl
of a whippingboi game plai by eighteenthcenturi sailor the sailor ti up a group of
young boi in a straight line restrain each boi left hand and place a whip in the right
hand the first boi in line wa given a light blow on the back and told to do the same to the
person immedi in front of him each boi hit the next in line and each on wa hit in
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4105
turn as skinner report it wa clearli in the interest of the group that all blow be gentl
but the inevit result wa a furiou lash 1 each boi in the line hit a littl harder than
he had been hit himself so after a few cycl the last blow would in fact be furiou
especi sinc each swing wa preced by pain creat an emot disposit of anger
and anxieti whip session arent a like happen in most compani but peopl
often exhibit a similar inclin toward catalyz reaction whisper session gradual
evolv into fullblown discuss that echo into the hallwai minor financi indiscret
grow into largescal larceny2
ideal behavior manag could anticip thi catalyz and redirect the energi but
what if that is not an option though the do llar amount and the audac of some white
collar crime boggl the averag observ mind the crime remain an act of behavior and
thu should be approach by the same method us to analyz a 4500 credit card fraud
the perpetr mai be describ as obs ssive and megalomaniac but he is still
behav in a network of action with hi behavior subject to oper condit
the dollar amount ar in fact mislead onc the stake reach a certain level it not even
plausibl to look for explan involv a lack of respect or appreci wheelerdeal
and armchair analyst often aver that it not realli the monei and theyr right
highdollar crimin describ their machin as a kick or thrill thei feel like theyr
plai a game and it the game of their live behaviorist agre monei is a gener
reinforc link with mani posit factor directli and often take on a symbol power
of it own therebi yield a condit of strength skinner sai we ar automat
reinforc apart from ani particular depriv when we successfulli control the physic
world 3 so we need not be starv in order to act especi with the sens of control
symbol and liter gain by acquir monei gameplai exert someth similar on
it particip someon who manipul a chess board or a deck of card successfulli
gain a sens of strength over extern event we can plai the game for it own sake
becaus it yield the impress of strength imagin then the behavior stroke that
happen when the game power is combin with the power of monei as a gener
reinforc and both of these factor ar plai out with real peopl and set the
1 skinner bf scienc and human behavior macmillan publish new york 1953 p 309
2 compar the excus everybodi doe it it often tr ue that an impress number of other peopl in the
perpetr peer group were themselv break the law a condit catalyz by intens interact and
result in more seriou crime
3 skinner p 77
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4106 2011 fraud examin manual
dealmak is race through a thicket of reinforc and the greater the riskfinanci
legal or personalth greater the thrill the stimulu isnt the monei as a thing in itself ani
more than monei for it own sake prompt the miser in either case the condit of
strength we might even call it power feed the behav person monei just happen to
be the reinforc par excel of our cultur
deal with highstak crimin will remain difficult despit our understand of their
behavior not just becaus the amount of monei and the network of action ar so
complex but becaus the condit is so intens how for exampl can you replac the
kick of score a 35milliondollar take in a threedai scam can a career con be prompt
to give up the deceit practic that have mark hi experi find genuin and
specif answer mai be delai for some time but thei will like follow the same pattern
weve discuss with other crime
modifi the circumst of the behavior by for exampl make legitim
busi a more opportun place for dare and innov techniqu
extinguish the crimin behavior by prevent it success us regul control
and supervis
encourag behavior incompat with crimin activ through educ practic
and demonstr valu that call the crimin lifestyl howev flashi into question
the specif measur will be particular to the crime the action dictat the respons but
whether were deal with a work mother credit card fraud or berni madoff palati
scheme our method can be behavior fraud examin mai never erad crime
complet but by approach crimin act scientif we can becom more success
in anticip and prevent the act
conclus
to successfulli recogn detect and prevent fraud the examin ha to take into account
as mani variabl as possibl and ha to learn a great deal about how human beingsa
individu and in groupsbehav
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4107
all the effort of behavior engin notwithstand the question of behavior final
rest with the person who behav in walden two the founder of skinner utopian
commun admit that there is onli so much that can be done by cultur design
you cant forese all futur circumst and you cant specifi adequ futur conduct
you dont know what will be requir instea d you have to set up certain behavior
process which will lead the individu to design hi own good conduct when the time
come we call that sort of thing selfcontrol 4
no substitut exist for the consciou individu make a choic to act and no scienc can
predict or shape behavior with pure accuraci there ar just too mani factor at work in the
network of action howev selfcontrol is a behavior that is guid by condit in the
same wai ani other act would be
it doe littl good for exampl to tell an alcohol stop drink control yourself the
command alon ha littl forc even if the alcohol want to stop drink famili
member can suggest that the man simpli throw awai hi bottl but the princip
problem skinner interject is to get him to do it 5 the famili can howev help
condit the alcohol selfcontrol by regi tere disapprov of drink by reinforc
the man success resist to drink and by encourag the man to do thing
incompat with a drink life thei cant fo llow the man through everi step of hi life he
ha to resist the impuls to sneak a sip on hi own but the behavior of resist is
strengthen by hi famili member intervent selfcontrol as a behavior is shape by
variabl in the environ and the histori of the individu 6
understand why peopl do certain thing allow us to go beyond a simplist insist
that crimin control themselv we will in stead have to consid how thi control can
be condit prevent the behavior directli when possibl but ultim reli on
each individu have adequ absorb the principl of selfcontrol
4 id at p 96
5 id at p 240
6 ibid famili member in thi type of situat often ask the alcohol dont you see what your do the
answer mai sometim be no becaus selfknowledg is a discrimin behavioran act of cognit that
label and organ inform as a behavior selfknowledg is of cours influenc by condit we
recogn or know what weve been condit to know thu treatment program often encourag
patient to reflect on their behavior in certain wai condit a selfknowledg that will contribut to self
control
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4108 2011 fraud examin manual
why peopl obei the law
now that we have a gener understand of at least some of the reason why human
behav the wai thei do let us turn our discuss to why peopl obei and contrarili break
the law in hi book why peopl obei the law tom tyler studi the two princip type of
lawabid peopl
obvious some peopl choos to obei the la w while other choos to break it mani
otherwis lawabid member of societi evad tax occasion us a control
substanc commit fraud or even drive under the influenc of alcohol accord to studi
by tyler the instrument and the norm perspect attempt to explain why some
follow the law to the letter while other obei select
instrument perspect
accord to thi theori peopl obei the law becaus thei fear punish when
review the incarcer rate in thi countri it is not difficult to discern that thi is the
perspect most adher to by policymak
a person of thi belief might exce the speed limit think that the benefit of save time
outweigh the risk of the potenti speed ticket these type ar unlik to rob a bank
though consid that success is doubt and the penalti is steep thei weigh the pro
and con of complianc with the law and act accordingli
norm perspect
the focu of thi perspect is what on consid just and moral when peopl believ
complianc is their moral oblig commit to the law is voluntari regardless of fear
of punish
peopl of thi belief mai indulg in illeg drug but refrain from steal on be moral
accept in their view and the other not other mai obei all law out of the belief that the
author ar just in ani case complianc is unforc and voluntari
natur the author prefer voluntari complianc from their point of view the
norm is prefer to the instrument perspect sinc the former doe not requir
7 tyler tom r why peopl obei the law 1990 yale univers press new haven
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4109
enforc if the public alreadi believ in the govern moral right to govern the
author job is made much easier
moral howev can work against the govern as it did with the us public moral
indign over the vietnam conflict for instanc those who view the govern
author as legitim support the war regardless of their own view as to it necess
other consid the ongo struggl useless and wrong and oppos it
anoth signific differ between the instrument and the norm perspect is
whether on focus on procedur rather than result those adher to the norm
point of view will for exampl be more concern with be treat justli in court rather
than with win or lose their case thei will contentedli await judgment if dealt with
fairli peopl of thi opinion ar interest in neutral lack of bia honesti polit and
respect for on right the due process then is most effect in promot complianc
to those of thi view the instrumentalist on the other hand focus on the outcom of hi
case and is less concern with procedur in hi mind a procedur is fair if it is favor
legitimaci
by definit effect leadership must produc complianc with a leader decis
howev it is sometim the case that when new legisl or polici is introduc public
support and complianc do not occur suprem court decis notabl on school prayer do
not necessarili produc gener public accept of or adher to polici likewis if a
compani introduc a new polici that no employe mai take a gift no matter how small from
a potenti vendor mani employe will continu to take small gift anywai
alter citizen behavior by manipul access to valu resourc or threaten to
impos sanction is known as social control onc again the concept is that reward and
punish ar what caus peopl to obei the law peopl maxim their person gain and
compli base on deterr of cours life is more complic than reward and
punish otherwis the job of law enforc would be easi but social control
appeal to author the public understand deterr reward and punish in
contrast emphas the norm approach place power not in author but in the
peopl whose voluntari complianc is sought
in studi gener complianc with the law sociologist have found that deterr doe
not fulli explain why peopl obei the law citizen choos to obei the law when the chanc
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4110 2011 fraud examin manual
of be caught violat it ar virtual zero as when on might come upon a stop sign in a
desert street almost all american pai their incom tax in a voluntari system even
though the chanc of be caught shave tax ow ar small yet citizen break the law
when it is riski to do so as when thei bui illeg drug or embezzl thousand of dollar
from their compani
in a democraci the legal system cannot function if it can influenc peopl onli by
manipul reward and cost the resourc requir to enforc such a regim ar too
high deterr is expens to enforc and doe not guarante an adequ level of
obedi drunk drive is a good exampl studi show that an extrem high
invest of resourc is need to convinc peopl that the likelihood of be caught and
punish for drive drunk is high public campaign against drunk drive tend to
temporarili reduc the number of dui or dwi as long as citizen think the chanc of
be caught ar rise the incid of drunk drive remain lower howev as soon as
public percept of increas vigil against drunk drive lessen the number of arrest
goe up again likewis as is discuss later in the fraud prevent program chapter
increas the percept of detect is a power antifraud program if an employe
think that hi compani is not pai attent to occup fraud then some employe
ar more like to try to get awai with it
consid the us of marijuana an illeg yet still popular drug if the reason peopl abstain
from us thi drug is that thei believ in compli with the law then obvious in their
ey the author have legitimaci howev if thei forgo marijuana us becaus it violat
their moral valu then it is their convict that ar the decid factor if fear of legal
punish stop them then deterr carri greater weight with them and if thei refrain
out of fear of social ostrac then the social group influenc prevail
a person own norm valu have the final sai about appropri behavior unlik the
reward and punish approach on own valu ar what produc complianc or
noncompli with the law in the end psychologist refer to thi as intern
oblig for which citizen take person respons
voluntari complianc
voluntari complianc matter onli to the extent to which it produc obedi that goe
beyond selfinterest measur by most of us by reward and punish a norm
speeder for instanc will accept be a few minut late to hi appoint in order to
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4111
obei the speed limit thu make the road safer for everyon a norm employe will
accept a salari freez and not steal from the compani to make up for the rais he wa
promis in other word these peopl will act against their own best interest if thei feel
complianc with the rule is of greater moral import
of cours govern author recogn that without the good will of the public thei
could not function their aim must be to maxim complianc and minim hostil
toward law while gain legitimaci in the ey of the public ani leader who want to
effect govern must have legitimaci with hi subordin the same is true for
employ manag teacher and armi sergeant otherwis complianc will not occur
due to it signific social impact social scientist and politician have found legitimaci to
be an issu of major concern it is seen as a reservoir of loyalti from which leader can draw
opinion poll on the public attitud toward the law and the govern ar realli about
public confid in the govern legitimaci if the public doe not have confid in
the legal system obedi to law is unlik
studi show that both children and adult feel a strong oblig to obei the law whether
we can attribut thi to their norm valu or the legitimaci of the author is the real
question natur those who view the author as legitim ar more like to compli
thi lead to the conclus that norm support of the system result in compliant
behavior
measur legitimaci and complianc
a studi by tyler call the chicago studi focus on six law with which peopl deal on a
daili basi disturb the peac litter dr iv while intox speed shoplift and
park illeg particip were ask how often thei had broken these law in the past
year most admit to park illeg 51 pe rcent and speed 62 percent but veri few
admit to shoplift 3 percent twentyseven percent confess to disturb the peac
25 percent to litter and 19 percent admit to have driven while under the influenc
the second wave of interview in which particip were ask about a shorter time frame
produc similar result to measur fear of punish respond were ask how like
thei thought it wa that thei would be arrest or issu a citat if thei violat these six
law eightythre percent thought it wa like thei would be caught drive drunk 78
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4112 2011 fraud examin manual
percent thought the same for park violat and shoplift 72 percent for speed 35
percent for disturb the peac and 31 percent for litter
particip were then gaug for peer approv for shoplift 89 percent said that thei
thought that the five adult thei know best would disapprov eightysix percent said the
same for drunk drive as did 51 percent for litter 52 percent for speed 44 percent
for illeg park and 53 percent for disturb the peac
the next question wa design to measur respond moral thei were ask whether
each offens wa wrong almost everi on of the particip felt that ani violat of
the six law were wrong speed came out as the least immor and shoplift the most
with 99 percent of particip consid it moral objection
on see that citizen seem to view the break of law as a violat of their person
moral interestingli most believ the chanc of get caught ar high and sinc peer
disapprov level ar rel light on can gather that the social group is the sourc of the
least amount of pressur to obei law
more than four out of five particip felt a person should obei the law even if it goe
against what thei think is right almost as mani respond felt that disobei the law is
seldom justifi and that obedi and respect for author ar the most import virtu
children should learn
legitimaci and complianc
legitimaci is regard as the essenti ingredi in what give govern and leader
author the idea is that if the author have legitimaci the public will obei the law
tyler chicago studi howev wa design to put thi concept to the test
the studi did show that legitimaci is relat to complianc particip who attribut
greater legitimaci to author were more like to obei the law for instanc thi doe not
prove a causal relationship though the result of the studi were analyz to account for
demograph and sociolog factor thi regress analysi suggest that legitimaci ha
a signific effect on complianc regardless of the other factor
certainli legitimaci impact on a person is in fluenc by hi person experi with
polic and court a person who feel mistreat by the author is certainli less like to
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4113
have confid in their legitimaci and therefor is less like to obei law in such case
peer approv seem to take on greater import in those peopl think on more
interest result wa that those particip who consid themselv polit liber
were more like than those who regard themselv as moder to base compliant
behavior on feel of legitimaci
implic of the chicago studi
author do not take complianc with the law for grant thei often find that occasion
noncompli must be toler sometim noncompli is so widespread that it cast
doubt upon the effect and valid of the law itself prohibit for exampl wa
wide and often openli violat befor it repeal the result of the studi suggest that
norm valu ar more influenti upon complianc than the reward and punish
approach thi is consist with skinner behavior theori discuss previous
again the studi show that peopl have a high level of norm commit to abid by
the law most particip felt that break the law wa moral wrong and that law
should be obei even when on doe not agre with themth my countri right or
wrong approach author who can tap into and encourag those view will of cours
inspir complianc employe who have a strong sens of loyalti to their employ will
not violat compani polici becaus such act would be a betray to the compani
the psycholog variabl
the chicago studi wa design to gaug the gap between citizen concern for favor
outcom and procedur fair it also measur the extent to which fair influenc
reaction to experi the experi in question is of the everydai averagecitizen
varietyth type of encount most of us have with author over rel minor
matter particip report call the polic for a number of reason accid
disturb suspici activ and crime against properti or violent crime the
major of caller felt it wa import for the polic to solv their problem whether it wa
seriou or not
polic respons time wa satisfactori to most respond onli 15 percent felt that the
polic did not respond quickli enough nearli 70 percent knew what action the polic had
taken to solv the problem and almost twothird of those said that the polic settl the
situat the 43 percent who said that the polic fail to solv their problem admit that
thei did do everyth thei could all in all 71 percent said thei were satisfi with the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4114 2011 fraud examin manual
outcom of their call most respond also felt that thei were treat quit well by the
polic eightysix percent express overal satisfact with their polit concern for
their right proprieti attent honesti and willing to consid their opinion
respond who were stop by the polic natur had less magnanim feel
toward them still 73 percent of those who receiv ticket for minor offens consid
the outcom fair acknowledg that the ticket wa deserv
satisfact level of particip who had to go to court were similarli high 80 percent
consid their treatment fair howev 36 percent state that thei believ the judg
could have reach a better outcom overal though particip were content with these
element of our justic system
legitimaci and experi
peopl will accept unfavor rule if thei believ thei were dealt with fairli thu fair
procedur can cushion the blow of an outcom that is to on disadvantag without
damag the author legitimaci of cours fair procedur can onli go so far if fair
procedur consist produc unfavor result the fair of the procedur
themselv will come into question
peopl place import on procedur for sever reason the first of which is simplic
often the result itself is difficult to classifi as fair or unfair peopl therefor focu on the
step that lead up to the outcom anoth reason such emphasi is place on procedur is
that with as much religi and ethnic divers that the unit state ha peopl do not
alwai concur on what is fair although most peopl mai not necessarili agre upon the
outcom thei ar usual of on mind as to the justic of the procedur
the procedur aspect of the law and how the public perceiv them must be of great
import to author of cours policymak must have a good idea of what the public
consid fair if the public perceiv a court legal action as just thei will support the
outcom although it might not be to their advantag plea bargain for exampl is often
justifi base on outcom but if the inconsist in plea agreement is seen as unfair
support for the legal system will weaken likewis nofault insur mai make sens in
econom term but mai dilut the basic principl underli our legal system those
individu ar respons for their own action
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4115
the same is true in the corpor environ employe will often accept unpopular
compani polici if the employe feel that the polici is appli fairli for instanc
employe mai be upset that the compani provid onli three paid sick dai but if the rule
is appli to all employe in an equal manner most employe will live with the polici
howev if some employe ar allow addit sick dai and other ar not employe
begin to resent the polici and the compani in other word these employe feel thei ar
be treat unfairli
the mean of procedur justic
an import issu left unaddress until now is how peopl decid which procedur ar
fair and which ar not previou effort to studi thi question have focus on control two
area of control with which peopl ar gener concern ar decis control control over
the actual decis made and process control control over the opportun to state
on case
to better illustr let us take the exampl of an attornei repres a client in court
while the client surrend control of the case to hi attornei he mai still seek to maintain
as much control as he can through control of the process accord to the instrument
perspect he will valu the opportun to testifi onli insofar as it help to achiev a
benefici outcom to hi case studi show howev that most of us appreci the chanc
to air our view regardless of whether it influenc the outcom or not from thi on can
conclud that process control ha an independ impact on how on perceiv fair and
whether on is satisfi with the outcom on satisfact with the outcom and on
opinion of fair procedur depend larg on on degre of control
again on must ask what criteria peopl us to decid whether a procedur is fair gs
leventh propos six standard for evalu the fair of a procedur
repres
consist
suppress of bia
accuraci
correct
ethic
repres relat to those parti whose concern ar affect throughout the
alloc process consist refer to the uniform and unbias treatment of all of the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4116 2011 fraud examin manual
affect parti suppress of bia guarante that those involv with the outcom have no
person vest interest in the case thi also prohibit a particip relianc on previous
form opinion rather than just the evid at hand as when a juror convict becaus he
believ most defend ar guilti accuraci refer to object high qualiti correct
involv the check and balanc provid in the system which allow unfair decis to be
correct such as the appeal process ethic of cours involv the degre to which
procedur meet gener held ethic standard of fair and moral tortur for
instanc is a violat of ethic as it is a breach of basic moral code
studi measur the import of leventh six criteria show that peopl place the most
import on consist accuraci repres and suppress bia ar also
highli valu
base on tyler chicago studi the author hypothesi is that in encount with the polic
peopl ar more concern with fair than with the policeman adher to formal
issu of right ie ethic in the courtroom howev ethic standard and right
receiv greater emphasi
peopl view on procedur fair ar affect by two factor background characterist
and prior view race educ incom sex ag and polit view ar the most
import background characterist those who ar liber and better educ will place
the most emphasi on ethic when decid if a procedur is just minor ar more
like to focu on consist and suppress of bia though prior view form perhap
from past experi carri more weight than background characterist ani background
characterist is certain to be overridden by on prior view on a subject
influenc of control on the mean of procedur justic
the chicago studi assess process control by question respond about how much
opportun thei had to state their case or present their problem decis control wa
measur by ask how much influenc particip had over the determin made by
the third parti in control most particip fe lt thei had a high 43 percent to moder 20
percent level of process control in contrast a number of particip felt thei had littl
decis control about half said not much at all
the chicago studi thu lead on to conclud that process control judgment is the decid
factor when assess procedur justic in term of control process control judgment ar
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4117
also import in assess how experi affect peopl evalu of procedur justic
ergo respond ar more concern with their opportun to speak out rather than
their influenc over the outcom the belief of citizen that their view ar be weigh
and consid by the author and that the author ar deal fairli with them
reinforc their belief in their own process and decis control
in the employ context the studi tend to support the idea that employe should be
involv in the develop of polici and procedur instead of just distribut a fraud
polici or an ethic polici send out a questionnair ask employe for their idea on how
fraud and corrupt can be prevent in the compani if employe feel thei have some
control over the rule thei will be more like to obei and follow them
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4201
