2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Reinforcing and Punishing


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Reinforcing and Punishing 
REINFORCEMENT Presents positive stimuli Withdraws negative stimuli 
PUNISHMENT Presents negative stimuli Withdraws positive stimuli 
 
In an act of punishment, the polarities, so to speak, are reversed. Faced with an undesired 
behavior, the punisher presents a negative stimulus. A father, hearing his son tell a 
particularly raunchy story, puts a bar of soap into the boy’s mouth. Punishment may also be 
administered by withdrawing a positive stimulus. “Your room is still filthy,” the father tells 
his languid child, “so you can’t use the car.” The boy suffers from thwarted desire.  
 
Punishment fights a losing battle in manipulating behavior because it works by providing 
negative consequences—administering unpleasantries and taking away desirables. A car or 
the thrill of a racy story doesn’t become less attractive for its use in punishment; its power to 
stimulate is simply squelched. Reinforcement, on the other hand, proceeds, like the old song, 
to “accentuate the positive.” Skinner concludes that  behavior is most effectively modified by 
managing and modifying desires through reinforcement; he wants to replace destructive 
behaviors with productive ones, instead of trying to punish an already existing impulse. 
 
Behaviorism points toward a number of alternatives to punishment. Chief among these is to 
modify the circumstances  surrounding the act. If an employee is experiencing financial problems, 
there may be ways a company can help alleviate pressures through credit counseling, pay 
advances, or low-interest loans, thereby alleviating financial difficulties without the employee 
resorting to fraud. In other instances, employees engage in fraud because they feel underpaid 
or unappreciated.  
 
Emotions, according to Skinner, are a predisposition for people’s actions. Anger is not itself 
a behavior, but a state of being that predisposes people to do things like yell or fight. Anger 
is a part of a person’s response, to the extent that an angry man is more likely to get in a 
shouting match with his friends. And since the emotional associations of any event are 
important factors in conditioning behavior, the associations can be manipulated in 
conditioning the behavior. That’s why advertisers use cute babies to sell toilet paper—the 
image associates the toilet paper with the emotions evoked by the baby. A company portrays 
its founder as a father figure for a similar reason. When managers are faced with disgruntled 
employees, they can modify these emotional circumstances, not just with “image” work, but 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
with adequate compensation and recognition of workers’ accomplishments. Incentive 
programs and task-related bonuses follow this principle, assuming that employees who feel 
challenged and rewarded by their jobs will produce more work at a higher quality, and are 
less likely to violate the law. 
 
Another non-punitive approach drives the undesirable behavior into extinction by 
preventing the expected response. This is a specialized version of modifying the 
circumstances. Businesses perform an extinction strategy by implementing a system of 
internal controls. In requiring several signatures for a transaction, for example, a bank 
prevents any one employee from gaining access to money. This approach doesn’t involve 
reinforcements or punitive measures; it simply modifies the structure in which acts take 
place. The perception of internal controls provides a particularly strong deterrent to fraud 
because it obstructs the operant behavior that has heretofore been linked with positive 
reinforcement. We prevent the act by blocking the expected response. Criminal behavior is 
discouraged because crime doesn’t pay. 
 
A related strategy overcomes improper behavior by encouraging the behavior’s “opposite.” 
Skinner says we can condition incompatible behavior  that interferes with the person’s usual acts. 
Instead of punishing a child’s emotional tantrums, for example, the behaviorist rewards the 
child for controlling emotional outbursts; we drive the tantrums into extinction by not 
responding, and reinforce the stoical behavior. A destructive behavior is offset by an 
incompatible productive one. Since fraud involves dishonesty, secretiveness, and antagonistic 
behaviors, the astute manager finds ways to reward the opposite behaviors — honesty, 
openness, and cooperation.  
 
Of course, it’s easier to list these strategies in a few paragraphs than it is to implement them. 
Even the most seemingly simple acts can become tangled as people and circumstances 
interact. A perfectly sound theoretical reinforcement—an employee incentive program, 
perhaps—may be viewed with suspicion by disgruntled workers. Behavioral modification is 
never easy, Skinner says; reinforcements “must  be sensitive and complex” because people’s 
lives are complicated and their behaviors sensitized. For example, people in groups often 
interact in alarming and unstable ways. Skinner demonstrates this tendency with the example 
of a whipping-boy game played by eighteenth-century sailors. The sailors tied up a group of 
young boys in a straight line, restraining each boy’s left hand and placing a whip in the right 
hand. The first boy in line was given a light blow on the back and told to do the same to the 
person immediately in front of him. Each boy hit the next in line, and each one was hit in 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.105  
turn. As Skinner reports, “It was clearly in the interest of the group that all blows be gentle, 
[but] the inevitable result was a furious lashing.” 1 Each boy in the line hit a little harder than 
he had been hit himself; so after a few cycles, the last blows would, in fact, be furious 
(especially since each swing was preceded by pain, creating an emotional disposition of anger 
and anxiety). Whipping sessions aren’t a likely happening in most companies, but people 
often exhibit a similar inclination toward catalyzed reactions: whispering sessions gradually 
evolve into full-blown discussions that echo into the hallways; minor financial indiscretions 
grow into large-scale larceny.2 
 
Ideally, behavioral managers could anticipate this catalyzing and redirect the energies, but 
what if that is not an option? Though the do llar amounts (and the audacity) of some white-
 collar crimes boggle the average observer’s mind, the crime remains an act of behavior and 
thus should be approachable by the same method used to analyze a $4,500 credit card fraud. 
The perpetrator may be described as “obse ssive” and “megalomaniacal,” but he is still 
behaving in a network of actions, with his behavior subject to operant conditioning.  
 
The dollar amounts are in fact misleading. Once the stakes reach a certain level, it’s not even 
plausible to look for explanations involving a lack of respect or appreciation. Wheeler-dealers 
and armchair analysts often aver that “It’s not really the money,” and they’re right. 
High-dollar criminals describe their machinations as a “kick” or thrill; they feel like they’re 
playing a game, and it’s the game of their lives. Behaviorists agree. Money is a “generalized 
reinforcer,” linked with many positive factors  directly and often taking on a symbolic power 
of its own, thereby yielding a condition of strength. Skinner says, “We are automatically 
reinforced, apart from any particular deprivation, when we successfully control the physical 
world.” 3 So we need not be starving in order to act, especially with the sense of control —
symbolic and literal — gained by acquiring money. Game-playing exerts something similar on 
its participants; someone who manipulates a chess board or a deck of cards successfully 
gains a sense of strength over external events. We can play the game “for its own sake” 
because it yields the impression of strength. Imagine, then, the behavioral stroke that 
happens when the game’s power is combined with the power of money as a generalized 
reinforcer, and both of these factors are played out with real people and settings. The 
                                                 
1 Skinner, B.F. Science and Human Behavior. Macmillan Publishing: New York, 1953. p. 309. 
2 Compare the excuse “Everybody does it.” It’s often tr ue that an impressive number of other people in the 
perpetrator’s peer group were themselves breaking the law, a condition catalyzed by intense interaction and 
resulting in more serious crimes. 
3 Skinner, p. 77. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
dealmaker is racing through a thicket of reinforcements, and the greater the risk—financial, 
legal, or personal—the greater the thrill. The stimulus isn’t the money as a thing in itself, any 
more than money for its own sake prompts the miser. In either case, the condition of 
strength (we might even call it “power”) feeds the behaving person; money just happens to 
be the reinforcer par excellence of our culture.  
 
Dealing with high-stakes criminals will remain difficult, despite our understanding of their 
behavior. Not just because the amounts of money and the networks of action are so 
complex, but because the conditioning is so intense. How, for example, can you replace the 
kick of scoring a $35-million-dollar take in a three-day scam? Can a career con be prompted 
to give up the deceitful practices that have marked his experience? Finding genuine and 
specific answers may be delayed for some time, but they will likely follow the same pattern 
we’ve discussed with other crimes:  
• Modifying the circumstances of the behavior by, for example, making legitimate 
businesses a more opportune place for daring and innovative techniques  
• Extinguishing the criminal behavior by preventing its success using regulation, controls, 
and supervision  
• Encouraging behaviors incompatible with criminal activity, through educational practices 
and demonstrating “values” that call the criminal lifestyle, however flashy, into question  
 
The specific measures will be particular to the crime. The actions dictate the response. But 
whether we’re dealing with a working mother’s credit card fraud, or Bernie Madoff’s palatial 
schemes, our methods can be behavioral. Fraud examiners may never eradicate crime 
completely, but by approaching criminal acts scientifically, we can become more successful 
in anticipating and preventing the acts.  
 
Conclusion 
To successfully recognize, detect, and prevent fraud, the examiner has to take into account 
as many variables as possible, and has to learn a great deal about how human beings—as 
individuals and in groups—behave.  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.107  
All the efforts of behavioral engineering notwithstanding, the question of behavior finally 
rests with the person who behaves. In Walden Two, the founder of Skinner’s utopian 
community admits that there is only so much that can be done by cultural design:  
 
You can’t foresee all future circumstances, and you can’t specify adequate future conduct. 
You don’t know what will be required. Instea d, you have to set up certain behavioral 
processes which will lead the individual to design his own “good” conduct when the time 
comes. We call that sort of thing “self-control.” 4  
 
No substitute exists for the conscious individual making a choice to act. And no science can 
predict or shape behavior with pure accuracy. There are just too many factors at work in the 
network of actions. However, self-control is a behavior that is guided by conditioning in the 
same way any other act would be.  
 
It does little good, for example, to tell an alcoholic “Stop drinking; control yourself.” The 
command alone has little force, even if the alcoholic wants to stop drinking. Family 
members can suggest that the man simply throw away his bottles, but “the principal 
problem,” Skinner interjects, “is to get him to do it.” 5 The family can, however, help 
condition the alcoholic’s self-control by regis tering disapproval of drinking, by reinforcing 
the man’s successful resistance to drink, and by encouraging the man to do things 
incompatible with a drinking life. They can’t fo llow the man through every step of his life; he 
has to resist the impulse to sneak a sip on his own. But the behavior of resistance is 
strengthened by his family members’ intervention.  “Self-control” as a behavior is shaped by 
“variables in the environment and the history of the individual.” 6 
 
Understanding why people do certain things allows us to go beyond a simplistic insistence 
that criminals “control themselves.” We will in stead have to consider how this control can 
be conditioned, preventing the behavior directly when possible, but ultimately relying on 
each individual having adequately absorbed the principles of self-control. 
 
                                                 
4 Id. at p. 96. 
5 Id. at p. 240. 
6 Ibid. Family members in this type of situation often ask the alcoholic “Don’t you see what you’re doing?” The 
answer may sometimes be “No,” because self-knowledge is  a discriminative behavior—an act of cognition that 
labels and organizes information. As a behavior, self-knowledge is of course influenced by conditioning; we 
recognize or “know” what we’ve been conditioned to  know. Thus, treatment programs often encourage 
patients to reflect on their behavior in certain ways, conditioning a self-knowledge that will contribute to self-
 control. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


reinforc and punish
reinforc present posit stimuli withdraw neg stimuli
punish present neg stimuli withdraw posit stimuli
in an act of punish the polar so to speak ar revers face with an undesir
behavior the punish present a neg stimulu a father hear hi son tell a
particularli raunchi stori put a bar of soap into the boi mouth punish mai also be
administ by withdraw a posit stimulu your room is still filthi the father tell
hi languid child so you cant us the car the boi suffer from thwart desir
punish fight a lose battl in manipul behavior becaus it work by provid
neg consequencesadminist unpleasantri and take awai desir a car or
the thrill of a raci stori doesnt becom less attract for it us in punish it power to
stimul is simpli squelch reinforc on the other hand proce like the old song
to accentu the posit skinner conclud that behavior is most effect modifi by
manag and modifi desir through reinforc he want to replac destruct
behavior with product on instead of try to punish an alreadi exist impuls
behavior point toward a number of altern to punish chief among these is to
modifi the circumst surround the act if an employe is experienc financi problem
there mai be wai a compani can help allevi pressur through credit counsel pai
advanc or lowinterest loan therebi allevi financi difficulti without the employe
resort to fraud in other instanc employe engag in fraud becaus thei feel underpaid
or unappreci
emot accord to skinner ar a predisposit for peopl action anger is not itself
a behavior but a state of be that predispos peopl to do thing like yell or fight anger
is a part of a person respons to the extent that an angri man is more like to get in a
shout match with hi friend and sinc the emot associ of ani event ar
import factor in condit behavior the associ can be manipul in
condit the behavior that why advertis us cute babi to sell toilet paperth
imag associ the toilet paper with the emot evok by the babi a compani portrai
it founder as a father figur for a similar reason when manag ar face with disgruntl
employe thei can modifi these emot circumst not just with imag work but
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4104 2011 fraud examin manual
with adequ compens and recognit of worker accomplish incent
program and taskrel bonus follow thi principl assum that employe who feel
challeng and reward by their job will produc more work at a higher qualiti and ar
less like to violat the law
anoth nonpunit approach drive the undesir behavior into extinct by
prevent the expect respons thi is a special version of modifi the
circumst busi perform an extinct strategi by implement a system of
intern control in requir sever signatur for a transact for exampl a bank
prevent ani on employe from gain access to monei thi approach doesnt involv
reinforc or punit measur it simpli modifi the structur in which act take
place the percept of intern control provid a particularli strong deterr to fraud
becaus it obstruct the oper behavior that ha heretofor been link with posit
reinforc we prevent the act by block the expect respons crimin behavior is
discourag becaus crime doesnt pai
a relat strategi overcom improp behavior by encourag the behavior opposit
skinner sai we can condit incompat behavior that interfer with the person usual act
instead of punish a child emot tantrum for exampl the behaviorist reward the
child for control emot outburst we drive the tantrum into extinct by not
respond and reinforc the stoical behavior a destruct behavior is offset by an
incompat product on sinc fraud involv dishonesti secret and antagonist
behavior the astut manag find wai to reward the opposit behavior honesti
open and cooper
of cours it easier to list these strategi in a few paragraph than it is to implement them
even the most seemingli simpl act can becom tangl as peopl and circumst
interact a perfectli sound theoret reinforcementan employe incent program
perhapsmai be view with suspicion by disgruntl worker behavior modif is
never easi skinner sai reinforc must be sensit and complex becaus peopl
live ar complic and their behavior sensit for exampl peopl in group often
interact in alarm and unstabl wai skinner demonstr thi tendenc with the exampl
of a whippingboi game plai by eighteenthcenturi sailor the sailor ti up a group of
young boi in a straight line restrain each boi left hand and place a whip in the right
hand the first boi in line wa given a light blow on the back and told to do the same to the
person immedi in front of him each boi hit the next in line and each on wa hit in
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4105
turn as skinner report it wa clearli in the interest of the group that all blow be gentl
but the inevit result wa a furiou lash 1 each boi in the line hit a littl harder than
he had been hit himself so after a few cycl the last blow would in fact be furiou
especi sinc each swing wa preced by pain creat an emot disposit of anger
and anxieti whip session arent a like happen in most compani but peopl
often exhibit a similar inclin toward catalyz reaction whisper session gradual
evolv into fullblown discuss that echo into the hallwai minor financi indiscret
grow into largescal larceny2
ideal behavior manag could anticip thi catalyz and redirect the energi but
what if that is not an option though the do llar amount and the audac of some white
collar crime boggl the averag observ mind the crime remain an act of behavior and
thu should be approach by the same method us to analyz a 4500 credit card fraud
the perpetr mai be describ as obs ssive and megalomaniac but he is still
behav in a network of action with hi behavior subject to oper condit
the dollar amount ar in fact mislead onc the stake reach a certain level it not even
plausibl to look for explan involv a lack of respect or appreci wheelerdeal
and armchair analyst often aver that it not realli the monei and theyr right
highdollar crimin describ their machin as a kick or thrill thei feel like theyr
plai a game and it the game of their live behaviorist agre monei is a gener
reinforc link with mani posit factor directli and often take on a symbol power
of it own therebi yield a condit of strength skinner sai we ar automat
reinforc apart from ani particular depriv when we successfulli control the physic
world 3 so we need not be starv in order to act especi with the sens of control
symbol and liter gain by acquir monei gameplai exert someth similar on
it particip someon who manipul a chess board or a deck of card successfulli
gain a sens of strength over extern event we can plai the game for it own sake
becaus it yield the impress of strength imagin then the behavior stroke that
happen when the game power is combin with the power of monei as a gener
reinforc and both of these factor ar plai out with real peopl and set the
1 skinner bf scienc and human behavior macmillan publish new york 1953 p 309
2 compar the excus everybodi doe it it often tr ue that an impress number of other peopl in the
perpetr peer group were themselv break the law a condit catalyz by intens interact and
result in more seriou crime
3 skinner p 77
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4106 2011 fraud examin manual
dealmak is race through a thicket of reinforc and the greater the riskfinanci
legal or personalth greater the thrill the stimulu isnt the monei as a thing in itself ani
more than monei for it own sake prompt the miser in either case the condit of
strength we might even call it power feed the behav person monei just happen to
be the reinforc par excel of our cultur
deal with highstak crimin will remain difficult despit our understand of their
behavior not just becaus the amount of monei and the network of action ar so
complex but becaus the condit is so intens how for exampl can you replac the
kick of score a 35milliondollar take in a threedai scam can a career con be prompt
to give up the deceit practic that have mark hi experi find genuin and
specif answer mai be delai for some time but thei will like follow the same pattern
weve discuss with other crime
modifi the circumst of the behavior by for exampl make legitim
busi a more opportun place for dare and innov techniqu
extinguish the crimin behavior by prevent it success us regul control
and supervis
encourag behavior incompat with crimin activ through educ practic
and demonstr valu that call the crimin lifestyl howev flashi into question
the specif measur will be particular to the crime the action dictat the respons but
whether were deal with a work mother credit card fraud or berni madoff palati
scheme our method can be behavior fraud examin mai never erad crime
complet but by approach crimin act scientif we can becom more success
in anticip and prevent the act
conclus
to successfulli recogn detect and prevent fraud the examin ha to take into account
as mani variabl as possibl and ha to learn a great deal about how human beingsa
individu and in groupsbehav
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4107
all the effort of behavior engin notwithstand the question of behavior final
rest with the person who behav in walden two the founder of skinner utopian
commun admit that there is onli so much that can be done by cultur design
you cant forese all futur circumst and you cant specifi adequ futur conduct
you dont know what will be requir instea d you have to set up certain behavior
process which will lead the individu to design hi own good conduct when the time
come we call that sort of thing selfcontrol 4
no substitut exist for the consciou individu make a choic to act and no scienc can
predict or shape behavior with pure accuraci there ar just too mani factor at work in the
network of action howev selfcontrol is a behavior that is guid by condit in the
same wai ani other act would be
it doe littl good for exampl to tell an alcohol stop drink control yourself the
command alon ha littl forc even if the alcohol want to stop drink famili
member can suggest that the man simpli throw awai hi bottl but the princip
problem skinner interject is to get him to do it 5 the famili can howev help
condit the alcohol selfcontrol by regi tere disapprov of drink by reinforc
the man success resist to drink and by encourag the man to do thing
incompat with a drink life thei cant fo llow the man through everi step of hi life he
ha to resist the impuls to sneak a sip on hi own but the behavior of resist is
strengthen by hi famili member intervent selfcontrol as a behavior is shape by
variabl in the environ and the histori of the individu 6
understand why peopl do certain thing allow us to go beyond a simplist insist
that crimin control themselv we will in stead have to consid how thi control can
be condit prevent the behavior directli when possibl but ultim reli on
each individu have adequ absorb the principl of selfcontrol
4 id at p 96
5 id at p 240
6 ibid famili member in thi type of situat often ask the alcohol dont you see what your do the
answer mai sometim be no becaus selfknowledg is a discrimin behavioran act of cognit that
label and organ inform as a behavior selfknowledg is of cours influenc by condit we
recogn or know what weve been condit to know thu treatment program often encourag
patient to reflect on their behavior in certain wai condit a selfknowledg that will contribut to self
control
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4108 2011 fraud examin manual
