2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Reinforcing and Punishing/Conclusion


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Conclusion 
To successfully recognize, detect, and prevent fraud, the examiner has to take into account 
as many variables as possible, and has to learn a great deal about how human beings—as 
individuals and in groups—behave.  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.107  
All the efforts of behavioral engineering notwithstanding, the question of behavior finally 
rests with the person who behaves. In Walden Two, the founder of Skinner’s utopian 
community admits that there is only so much that can be done by cultural design:  
 
You can’t foresee all future circumstances, and you can’t specify adequate future conduct. 
You don’t know what will be required. Instea d, you have to set up certain behavioral 
processes which will lead the individual to design his own “good” conduct when the time 
comes. We call that sort of thing “self-control.” 4  
 
No substitute exists for the conscious individual making a choice to act. And no science can 
predict or shape behavior with pure accuracy. There are just too many factors at work in the 
network of actions. However, self-control is a behavior that is guided by conditioning in the 
same way any other act would be.  
 
It does little good, for example, to tell an alcoholic “Stop drinking; control yourself.” The 
command alone has little force, even if the alcoholic wants to stop drinking. Family 
members can suggest that the man simply throw away his bottles, but “the principal 
problem,” Skinner interjects, “is to get him to do it.” 5 The family can, however, help 
condition the alcoholic’s self-control by regis tering disapproval of drinking, by reinforcing 
the man’s successful resistance to drink, and by encouraging the man to do things 
incompatible with a drinking life. They can’t fo llow the man through every step of his life; he 
has to resist the impulse to sneak a sip on his own. But the behavior of resistance is 
strengthened by his family members’ intervention.  “Self-control” as a behavior is shaped by 
“variables in the environment and the history of the individual.” 6 
 
Understanding why people do certain things allows us to go beyond a simplistic insistence 
that criminals “control themselves.” We will in stead have to consider how this control can 
be conditioned, preventing the behavior directly when possible, but ultimately relying on 
each individual having adequately absorbed the principles of self-control. 
 
                                                 
4 Id. at p. 96. 
5 Id. at p. 240. 
6 Ibid. Family members in this type of situation often ask the alcoholic “Don’t you see what you’re doing?” The 
answer may sometimes be “No,” because self-knowledge is  a discriminative behavior—an act of cognition that 
labels and organizes information. As a behavior, self-knowledge is of course influenced by conditioning; we 
recognize or “know” what we’ve been conditioned to  know. Thus, treatment programs often encourage 
patients to reflect on their behavior in certain ways, conditioning a self-knowledge that will contribute to self-
 control. 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


conclus
to successfulli recogn detect and prevent fraud the examin ha to take into account
as mani variabl as possibl and ha to learn a great deal about how human beingsa
individu and in groupsbehav
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4107
all the effort of behavior engin notwithstand the question of behavior final
rest with the person who behav in walden two the founder of skinner utopian
commun admit that there is onli so much that can be done by cultur design
you cant forese all futur circumst and you cant specifi adequ futur conduct
you dont know what will be requir instea d you have to set up certain behavior
process which will lead the individu to design hi own good conduct when the time
come we call that sort of thing selfcontrol 4
no substitut exist for the consciou individu make a choic to act and no scienc can
predict or shape behavior with pure accuraci there ar just too mani factor at work in the
network of action howev selfcontrol is a behavior that is guid by condit in the
same wai ani other act would be
it doe littl good for exampl to tell an alcohol stop drink control yourself the
command alon ha littl forc even if the alcohol want to stop drink famili
member can suggest that the man simpli throw awai hi bottl but the princip
problem skinner interject is to get him to do it 5 the famili can howev help
condit the alcohol selfcontrol by regi tere disapprov of drink by reinforc
the man success resist to drink and by encourag the man to do thing
incompat with a drink life thei cant fo llow the man through everi step of hi life he
ha to resist the impuls to sneak a sip on hi own but the behavior of resist is
strengthen by hi famili member intervent selfcontrol as a behavior is shape by
variabl in the environ and the histori of the individu 6
understand why peopl do certain thing allow us to go beyond a simplist insist
that crimin control themselv we will in stead have to consid how thi control can
be condit prevent the behavior directli when possibl but ultim reli on
each individu have adequ absorb the principl of selfcontrol
4 id at p 96
5 id at p 240
6 ibid famili member in thi type of situat often ask the alcohol dont you see what your do the
answer mai sometim be no becaus selfknowledg is a discrimin behavioran act of cognit that
label and organ inform as a behavior selfknowledg is of cours influenc by condit we
recogn or know what weve been condit to know thu treatment program often encourag
patient to reflect on their behavior in certain wai condit a selfknowledg that will contribut to self
control
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4108 2011 fraud examin manual
