2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/The Meaning of Procedural Justice


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


The Meaning of Procedural Justice 
An important issue left unaddressed until now is how people decide which procedures are 
fair and which are not. Previous efforts to study this question have focused on control. Two 
areas of control with which people are generally concerned are: decision control  (control over 
the actual decisions made) and process control (control over the opportunity to state  
one’s case). 
 
To better illustrate, let us take the example of an attorney representing a client in court. 
While the client surrenders control of the case to his attorney, he may still seek to maintain 
as much control as he can through control of the process. According to the instrumental 
perspective, he will value the opportunity to testify only insofar as it helps to achieve a 
beneficial outcome to his case. Studies show, however, that most of us appreciate the chance 
to air our views, regardless of whether it influences the outcome or not. From this, one can 
conclude that process control has an independent impact on how one perceives fairness and 
whether one is satisfied with the outcome (one’s satisfaction with the outcome and one’s 
opinion of fair procedures depends largely on one’s degree of control). 
 
Again, one must ask what criteria people use to decide whether a procedure is fair. G.S. 
Leventhal proposed six standards for evaluating the fairness of a procedure:  
• Representativeness 
• Consistency 
• Suppression of bias 
• Accuracy 
• Correctability  
• Ethicality 
 
Representativeness  relates to those parties whose concerns are affected throughout the 
allocation process. Consistency  refers to the uniform and unbiased treatment of all of the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
affected parties. Suppression of bias  guarantees that those involved with the outcome have no 
personal, vested interest in the case. This also prohibits a participant’s reliance on previously 
formed opinions rather than just the evidence at hand, as when a juror convicts because he 
believes most defendants are guilty. Accuracy  refers to objective high quality. Correctability  
involves the checks and balances provided in the system, which allow unfair decisions to be 
corrected, such as the appeals process. Ethicality, of course, involves the degree to which 
procedures meet generally held ethical standards of fairness and morality. Torture, for 
instance, is a violation of ethicality, as it is a breach of basic moral codes. 
 
Studies measuring the importance of Leventhal’s six criteria show that people place the most 
importance on consistency. Accuracy, representativeness, and suppressing bias are also 
highly valued. 
 
Based on Tyler’s Chicago Study, the author’s hypothesis is that in encounters with the police, 
people are more concerned with fairness than with the policeman’s adherence to formal 
issues of rights (i.e., ethicality). In the courtroom, however, ethical standards and rights 
receive greater emphasis. 
 
People’s views on procedural fairness are affected  by two factors: background characteristics 
and prior views. Race, education, income, sex, age, and political views are the most 
important background characteristics. Those who are liberal and better educated will place 
the most emphasis on ethicality when deciding if a procedure is just. Minorities are more 
likely to focus on consistency and suppression of bias, though. Prior views, formed perhaps 
from past experiences, carry more weight than background characteristics. Any background 
characteristic is certain to be overridden by one’s prior views on a subject. 
 



:


the mean of procedur justic
an import issu left unaddress until now is how peopl decid which procedur ar
fair and which ar not previou effort to studi thi question have focus on control two
area of control with which peopl ar gener concern ar decis control control over
the actual decis made and process control control over the opportun to state
on case
to better illustr let us take the exampl of an attornei repres a client in court
while the client surrend control of the case to hi attornei he mai still seek to maintain
as much control as he can through control of the process accord to the instrument
perspect he will valu the opportun to testifi onli insofar as it help to achiev a
benefici outcom to hi case studi show howev that most of us appreci the chanc
to air our view regardless of whether it influenc the outcom or not from thi on can
conclud that process control ha an independ impact on how on perceiv fair and
whether on is satisfi with the outcom on satisfact with the outcom and on
opinion of fair procedur depend larg on on degre of control
again on must ask what criteria peopl us to decid whether a procedur is fair gs
leventh propos six standard for evalu the fair of a procedur
repres
consist
suppress of bia
accuraci
correct
ethic
repres relat to those parti whose concern ar affect throughout the
alloc process consist refer to the uniform and unbias treatment of all of the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4116 2011 fraud examin manual
affect parti suppress of bia guarante that those involv with the outcom have no
person vest interest in the case thi also prohibit a particip relianc on previous
form opinion rather than just the evid at hand as when a juror convict becaus he
believ most defend ar guilti accuraci refer to object high qualiti correct
involv the check and balanc provid in the system which allow unfair decis to be
correct such as the appeal process ethic of cours involv the degre to which
procedur meet gener held ethic standard of fair and moral tortur for
instanc is a violat of ethic as it is a breach of basic moral code
studi measur the import of leventh six criteria show that peopl place the most
import on consist accuraci repres and suppress bia ar also
highli valu
base on tyler chicago studi the author hypothesi is that in encount with the polic
peopl ar more concern with fair than with the policeman adher to formal
issu of right ie ethic in the courtroom howev ethic standard and right
receiv greater emphasi
peopl view on procedur fair ar affect by two factor background characterist
and prior view race educ incom sex ag and polit view ar the most
import background characterist those who ar liber and better educ will place
the most emphasi on ethic when decid if a procedur is just minor ar more
like to focu on consist and suppress of bia though prior view form perhap
from past experi carri more weight than background characterist ani background
characterist is certain to be overridden by on prior view on a subject
