2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION 
 
Understanding human behavior and why people obey the law helps explain some of the 
reasons people commit fraud. However, there have been a number of theorists who have 
attempted to explain specifically why people commit crimes. In more sophisticated sciences, 
such as chemistry and physics, theories build on one another as new facts emerge from 
studies prompted by the reigning theories. In criminology (as in virtually all the social 
sciences), theories compete with one another for acceptance, with none of them adequately 
satisfying either practitioners or scholars in the field. 
 
The reason for this jumble of interpretations of criminal activity in large part lies in the fact 
that human beings, unlike inanimate objects, think for themselves. You can push a rock in a 
certain direction and it will (all other things being equal) move in that direction. But you 
cannot predict as simple a matter as the direction in which a human being might decide to 
proceed when confronted with a choice. Perhaps you can guess that he will go to the right 
because you know that this is the direction in which the store he wants to go to lies. But any 
human being, for reasons that satisfy him, can decide on any given day that he prefers to go 
to the left, perhaps just to saunter around or to get extra exercise, or for no particular reason 
that seems evident to him or to others.  
 
Imagine how much more difficult it is to try to predict very complicated human behaviors, 
such as criminal acts. 
 
The following sections summarize some of the better-known criminological theories, both 
past and present. 
 
 
Classical Criminology 
Classical criminology, based on the philosophical principle of utilitarianism, has its roots in 
the belief that human beings are rational and calculating creatures and therefore do things in 
order to avoid pain and produce pleasure. Some of the components of classical 
criminological theory are: 
• People have free will, which they can use to elect to engage in either criminal or 
noncriminal behavior. 
• Criminal behavior will be more attractive if the gains are estimated to be greater than  
the losses. 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.202   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• The more certain, severe, and swift the reaction to crime, the more likely it is that the 
penalties will control the behavior. 
 
Two theorists’ names are associated with classical criminology: the Italian Cesare Beccaria 
and the Englishman Jeremy Bentham. Bentham, marvelously eccentric, willed that his body 
be preserved and placed in the entryway to the University of London and brought to the 
table when the faculty meets. His wishes were carried out, and the body can still be seen 
today by anyone visiting the school. 
 
The policy implications of classical criminological thought, which are prominent today in 
theories grouped under the heading of “rational choice,” are that penalties should be 
established that make the anticipated results of criminal behavior less appealing than the 
prospects of the losses, such as the loss of freedom. The theory also has a benevolent 
component in that it suggests that penalties that are too severe serve no purpose, since they 
are needlessly excessive for the deterrence they seek to achieve. 
 
Utilitarianism  remains a much-favored approach to crime, with its assumption that offenders 
will calculate potential gains and losses before they decide to disobey the law. The U.S. 
Sentencing Commission proposals are based almost totally on the idea of classical 
criminology, mandating that monetary penalties be calculated at a level that will induce 
companies to conclude that breaking the law is not fiscally appealing. 
 
There are several major difficulties inherent in the theory, though. The first, of course, is that 
many people do not stop and add up the gains and losses of lawbreaking before they engage 
in it. Second, the impact of penalties can be very different for different people; the thought 
of a week in prison may be awful to one person, but a piece of cake to another. Third, it is 
very difficult to know whether the penalty will in fact result from the behavior; most 
offenders optimistically assume that they will not be caught. 
 
 
Routine Activities Theory 
Routine activities theory, a variation of classical theory, holds that both the motivation to 
commit crime and the supply of offenders is constant. There will always be a certain number 
of people, motivated by greed, lust, and other forces, who incline toward lawbreaking. The 
determining factor, particularly in predatory crimes such as those involving violence and 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.203  
theft, are the activities of potential victims. There are three important elements that  
influence crime: 
• The availability of suitable targets, such as companies and individuals 
• The absence of capable guardians, such as auditors and security personnel 
• The presence of motivated offenders, such as unhappy or financially  
challenged employees 
 
 
Biological Theories 
Biological theories  maintain that criminal behavior is not the result of choice (the calculation of 
benefits and potential losses), but rather is caused by the physical traits of those who commit 
crime. The foundations of biological theory were laid by Cesare Lombroso, an Italian doctor, 
who insisted that there were born criminals— people who were atavistic, or a throwback to 
more primitive human types. Lombroso spent his career measuring the bodies of offenders 
and concluded that they were marked by a high degree of asymmetry, with such things as 
sloping foreheads and other “anomalies.” Later critics would point out that Lombroso used 
no control group—that is, he did not measure people who were not criminals. If he had 
done so, he would have found that they shared equally in those kinds of traits that 
Lombroso presumed were indicative of criminal propensities. 
 
Biological theory continues to flourish today, with theorists seeking to locate genetic 
distinctions between those who break the law and those who obey it. In their book, The Bell 
Curve, Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray argue that low intelligence and crime are 
intimately connected and that low intelligence (as measured by I.Q. scores) is genetically 
transmitted. Some scholars in the field savaged the Herrnstein-Murray position, but it 
received a good deal of media attention. 
 
Biological theorists now take a much less deterministic position than Lombroso. They will 
point to this or that human characteristic and say that it, given certain environmental 
circumstances, is apt to produce illegal acts. Put another way, they report that they have 
found a large number of offenders with a biological trait, but that there are many more that 
have the trait who never get into any trouble with the law. 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.204   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Psychological Theories 
Theories rooted in psychology are based on the view that criminal behavior is the product of 
mental processes. The psychoanalytical ideas of Sigmund Freud focus on early childhood 
development and on unconscious motivations — that is, motivations of which the offender 
himself is not aware. Freud identified a three-part structure to human personality: the id (the 
drive for food, sex, and other life-sustaining things), the superego (the conscience that 
develops when learned values become incorporated into a person’s behavior), and the ego 
(the “I,” or the product of the interaction between what a person wants and what his 
conscience will allow him to do to achieve what he wants). 
 
Cognitive Theories 
Cognitive theories  stress inadequate moral and intellectual development as lying at the root of 
criminal acts. There are also personality theories, which illustrate the belief that traits such as 
extroversion are responsible for a significant amount of crime. 
 
Integrated Theories 
Integrated theories  draw from choice theory, biological theory, and psychological theory. One 
such argument is put forward by James Q. Wilson and Richard J. Herrnstein in their book 
Crime and Human Nature. Wilson and Herrnstein maintain that while criminal activity is a 
choice, this choice is heavily influenced by biological and psychological factors. They also 
explore social factors. The factors include family life, schools, and gang membership. 
 
Conditioning Theory 
H. J. Eysenck, working with what he calls conditioning theory, argues that the failure of a person 
to incorporate satisfactorily the dictates of society represents the major explanation for 
subsequent criminal behavior. Eysenck maintains that extroverted persons, both normal and 
neurotic, are more difficult to condition — that is, to train—than introverted persons, and 
that extroverts therefore get into more trouble than introverts. 
 
Another psychological theme is that frustration is the precursor of aggression. The theory 
suggests that the expression of aggression, such as a fraud perpetrator “getting back” at his 
employer, will alleviate the frustration and allow the organism to return to a more 
satisfactory state. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.205  
Social Structure Theories 
These theories concentrate on the kinds of societies that generate particular levels of crime. 
Why is crime so low in Japan and so high in the United States? Why do South American 
countries typically have high rates of homicide while England’s homicide rate is relatively 
low? There are various kinds of sociological theories, all based on similar premises but with 
differing emphases. 
 
As a group, social structure theories suggest that forces operating in the lower-class areas of 
the environment push many of their residents into criminal behavior. Social structure 
theorists challenge those who would suggest that crime is an expression of psychological 
imbalance, biological traits, personal choice, etc. They argue that people living in equivalent 
social environments seem to behave in a similar, predictable fashion. 
 
Theory of Anomie 
Strain theories are a branch of the social structure theory. Strain theorists view crime as a direct 
result of the frustration and anger people experience over their inability to achieve the social 
and financial success they desire. The best-known strain theory is Robert Merton’s theory of 
anomie. Robert Merton, a Columbia University sociologist, maintained that the discrepancy 
between what people are indoctrinated into desiring and the ways that are available to them 
to achieve such ends is the cornerstone for explanation of criminal behavior. More 
information about Merton is contained in the “Organizational Crime” chapter. 
 
Merton’s theory of anomie (that is, normlessn ess) was derived from the work of Emile 
Durkheim, a French sociologist who adopted the term in his effort to explain suicide rates 
among different social groups. For Merton, anomie  in the United States was characterized by 
an almost overpowering emphasis on the acquisition of things and on the fact that social 
status and importance is usually measured in terms of money.  
 
People can obtain money and material goods, Merton noted, by conforming—that is, by 
working at jobs and engaging in other legal enterprises that pay off. They can also withdraw 
from the fray, saying that they will not be driven by a desire for goods, but will opt out of 
the game that dominates society. The most withdrawn often tend to be those who employ 
illegal drugs to provide their satisfactions. Then there are the innovators —those who refuse to 
play by the accepted rules of the game, but turn to outlawed methods in order to accomplish 
what society has told them that they must achieve to be acceptable members. 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.206   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Social Process Theories 
Not all sociologists believe that a person’s social structure alone controls the direction of his 
values, attitudes, and behavior. After all, most people who reside in even the most 
deteriorated urban areas are law-abiding citizens. Social process theories hold that criminality is a 
function of individual socialization and the social-psychological interactions people have 
with the various organizations, institutions, and processes of society. 
 
Though they differ in many respects, the various social process theories all share one basic 
concept: all people, regardless of their race, cl ass, or gender, have the potential to become 
delinquents or criminals. 
 
Social Learning Theories 
Social learning theories  hold that criminal behavior is a function of the way people absorb 
information, viewpoints, and motivations from others, most notably from those with whom 
they are close, such as members of their peer group. Social learning theorists believe that all 
people have the potential to commit crime if they are exposed to certain kinds of 
circumstances. All people raised in France by French parents learn to speak that language; 
Poles learn to speak Polish. So too will a person raised with attitudes that favor criminal acts 
respond by committing such acts, and the person raised and living in an environment where 
criminal activity would be unthinkable will avoid crime;  indeed, crime might not even occur 
to him as a solution to whatever problem is confronting him. 
 
Theory of Differential Association 
The theory of differential association is undoubtedly the best-known among all explanations 
offered in the United States to account for crime, though it too has been widely criticized on 
the grounds that it is just about impossible to test. 
 
The theory first appeared as a systematic formulation in 1939 in the third edition of Edwin 
H. Sutherland’s Principles of Criminology. Later, Sutherland would make his best-known 
contribution to criminology by coining the phrase white-collar crime  and writing a 
monograph on the subject. Sutherland was particularly interested in fraud committed by 
the elite upper-world business executive, either against shareholders or the public. 
Sutherland said, “General Motors does not have  an inferiority complex, United States Steel 
does not suffer from an unresolved Oedipus problem, and the DuPonts do not desire to 
return to the womb. The assumption that an offender may have such pathological 
distortion of the intellect or the emotions seems to me absurd, and if it is absurd regarding 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.207  
the crimes of businessmen, it is equally absurd regarding the crimes of persons in the 
economic lower classes.” 1 
 
The theory of differential association begins by asserting that criminal behavior is learned. 
Explicating that idea, Sutherland specifies as a second point that criminal behavior is learned 
in interaction with other persons in a process of communication. If individuals acquiring 
criminal habits or propensities were exposed to situations, circumstances, and interactions 
totally of a criminal nature, it would be relatively easy to comprehend how this process of 
communication operates. In view of the enormous variation in standards and personalities to 
which any individual in our society is exposed, it becomes exceedingly difficult to discern 
those critical elements that induce criminal behavior without the intervention of some 
additional principle. 
 
Sutherland’s third point is that criminal beha vior is acquired through participation within 
intimate personal groups. This particular stress suggests that the roots of crime must be 
sought in the socializing experiences of the individual. Unfortunately, the process of 
socialization is far from being adequately understood. Sutherland’s fourth point indicates 
that the criminal learning process includes not only techniques of committing crime, but also 
the shaping of motives, drives, rationalizations, and attitudes. Crime techniques often 
involve a high degree of skill; picking pockets (and not getting caught) demands considerable 
adroitness, and being a successful prostitute demands knowing how to hustle customers, 
collect money, buy police protection, and deal with a drunken or violent john. 
 
Fifth, Sutherland narrows his focus by indicating the kinds of pressures that move the 
learning process in the direction of acceptance of illegal pursuits. Careful to keep within the 
legal definitions of behavior, Sutherland stipulates that the specific direction of motives and 
drives is learned from definitions of the legal codes as favorable or unfavorable. 
 
And sixth, he sets out his core point by establishing the principle of “differential 
association.” According to this postulate, a person becomes a criminal because of an excess 
of definitions favorable to violation of the law over definitions unfavorable to violation of 
the law. Then, as a means of demonstrating with greater clarity the character of associations 
that have a subsequent effect on behavior, Sutherland states his seventh point— that 
differential association may vary in frequency, duration, priority, and intensity. But there is 
                                                 
1 Quoted in Geis, Gilbert. On White-collar Crime.  (Lexington: Lexington Books, 1982). 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.208   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
no suggestion regarding which of these elements is apt to be more important than the 
others. Frequent contacts may promote feelings of boredom and indifference; one intense 
experience may overwhelm all prior learning, or it may not. The axiom hardly helps us much 
in unraveling the causal contents of crime. 
 
Sutherland’s eighth point concerns the nature of  learning and, again, is primarily a didactic 
statement of common behavioral science understanding rather than a contribution that 
moves the theory very far forward: learning criminal and delinquent behavior, Sutherland 
asserts, involves all the mechanisms that are involved in any other learning. The key problem 
is not that Sutherland is wrong; it is that he casts into the spotlight a theoretical problem that 
has plagued students of human behavior since time immemorial. If crime is to be 
understood as learned like anything else—say, basketball skills, cooking, patriotism, and 
flirting—then any theory that can unravel its in gredients will at the same time have to set 
before us an understanding of all human action. Sutherland’s propositions can hardly 
pretend to approach so stunning an intellectual achievement, and in this respect, can be 
regarded as extraordinarily overambitious or, perhaps, simplistic. 
 
As his next to last proposition, Sutherland stresses that learning differs from pure 
imitation. His last point is a worthwhile reminder that while criminal behavior is an 
expression of general needs and values, it is not explained by these general needs and 
values because noncriminal behavior is an expression of the same needs and values. This 
injunction indicates that the generalizations sometimes employed to account for crime? 
such as the view that people steal because they crave esteem or are greedy, or kill because 
they are unhappy?have little scientific merit. People, both criminals and noncriminals, are 
motivated by much the same needs and values. They become or do not become criminals 
on the basis of their unique responses to common drives for prestige, happiness, success, 
power, wealth, and numerous other human aspirations. An individual may feel a pressing 
need for money and take an extra weekend job pumping gas, or try to borrow from a 
friend, or shrug his shoulders and figure that this time he’ll do without. Another person, 
feeling the same need, may hold up a fast food outlet. 
 
Social Control Theory  
Travis Hirschi, in his 1969 book, Causes of Delinquency, first articulated the social control theory. A 
particularly important reason for the current dominance of control theory as the 
interpretative scheme for understanding crime and delinquency is that, unlike theories such 
as differential association, it offers a considerable number of testable propositions. Such 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.209  
propositions take the form of if-then statements: if something exists or is done, then it 
foretells that something will follow. Such formulations allow for experimental testing  
and rebuttal. 
 
Control theory takes its cue from a classic of sociology, Emile Durkheim’s Suicide, in which 
the French theoretician wrote:  
 
The more weakened the groups to which [the individual belongs], the less he depends on 
them, the more he consequently depends on him self and recognizes no other rules of conduct 
than what are founded on his private interests (Durkheim, 1951, p. 209). 
 
Essentially, control theory argues that the institutions of the social system train and press 
those with whom they are in contact into patterns of conformity. Schools train for 
adjustment in society, peers press the ethos of success and conventional behavior, and 
parents strive to inculcate law-abiding habits in their youngsters—even, Hirschi stresses, 
parents who themselves play fast and loose with the rules. The theory rests on the thesis that 
to the extent that a person fails to become attached to the variety of control agencies of the 
society, his chances of violating the law are increased. This doctrine edges very close to being 
self-evident in its insistence that close affiliation with law-abiding people, groups, and 
organizations is predictive of law-abiding behavior; however, it is notably rich with 
subordinate statements, some of them far from obvious. 
 
Four aspects of affiliation are addressed by the theory:  
• Attachment 
• Commitment 
• Involvement 
• Belief  
 
Attachment  refers primarily to affection-type ties with people such as parents, teachers, and 
peers. Commitment refers to cost factors involved in criminal activity. People are committed to 
conventional behavior and probably have invested something — fiscally and emotionally — in 
their ultimate success — an investment that they are wary of risking by means of a criminal 
act. Commitment might involve things such as obtaining a better job or seeing one’s children 
succeed. Involvement concerns matters such as time spent on the job — that is, participation in 
activities related to future goals and objectives. Belief refers to a conviction about the 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.210   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
legitimacy of conventional values, such as the law in general and criminal justice 
prescriptions in particular. 
 
Hirschi insists that there is no important relationship between social class and delinquency 
and crime; thus, a person in any class—lower, middle, or upper—who defaults on liaisons 
with the important formative agencies in our society will be more apt to find himself on a 
path that ends in crime. Among the important considerations, control theory stresses 
strongly, is “the bond of affection for conventional persons.” “The stronger this bond, the 
more likely the person is to take it into account when and if he contemplates a criminal act” 
(Hirschi, 1969, p. 83). What essentially happens, the theory suggests, is that people 
confronted with the possibility of behaving in a law-violative manner are likely to ask of 
themselves: “What will my wife — or my mother and father — think if they find out?” To the 
extent that individuals believe that other people whose opinions are important to them will 
be disappointed or ashamed, and to the extent that they care deeply that these people will 
feel this way, they will be constrained from engaging in the sanctioned behavior. 
 
Differential Reinforcement Theory 
Differential rei nforcement theory  is another attempt to explain crime as a type of learned behavior. 
It is a revision of Sutherland’s work that in corporates elements of psychological learning 
theory popularized by B. F. Skinner and the social learning theory discussed above. The 
theory was summarized by Ronald Akers in his 1977 work, Deviant Behavior: A Social Learning 
Approach. 
 
According to these behavioral theorists, people learn social behavior by operant conditioning —
 behavior controlled by stimuli that follow the behavior. Behavior is reinforced when positive 
rewards are gained or punishment is avoided (negative reinforcement). It is weakened by 
negative stimuli (punishment) and loss of reward (negative punishment). Whether deviant or 
criminal behavior is begun or persists depends on the degree to which it has been rewarded 
or punished and the rewards or punishments attached to its alternatives. This is the theory of 
differential reinforcement. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.301  



:


theori of crime causat
understand human behavior and why peopl obei the law help explain some of the
reason peopl commit fraud howev there have been a number of theorist who have
attempt to explain specif why peopl commit crime in more sophist scienc
such as chemistri and physic theori build on on anoth as new fact emerg from
studi prompt by the reign theori in criminolog as in virtual all the social
scienc theori compet with on anoth for accept with none of them adequ
satisfi either practition or scholar in the field
the reason for thi jumbl of interpret of crimin activ in larg part li in the fact
that human be unlik inanim object think for themselv you can push a rock in a
certain direct and it will all other thing be equal move in that direct but you
cannot predict as simpl a matter as the direct in which a human be might decid to
proce when confront with a choic perhap you can guess that he will go to the right
becaus you know that thi is the direct in which the store he want to go to li but ani
human be for reason that satisfi him can decid on ani given dai that he prefer to go
to the left perhap just to saunter around or to get extra exercis or for no particular reason
that seem evid to him or to other
imagin how much more difficult it is to try to predict veri complic human behavior
such as crimin act
the follow section summar some of the betterknown criminolog theori both
past and present
classic criminolog
classic criminolog base on the philosoph principl of utilitarian ha it root in
the belief that human be ar ration and calcul creatur and therefor do thing in
order to avoid pain and produc pleasur some of the compon of classic
criminolog theori ar
peopl have free will which thei can us to elect to engag in either crimin or
noncrimin behavior
crimin behavior will be more attract if the gain ar estim to be greater than
the loss
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4202 2011 fraud examin manual
the more certain sever and swift the reaction to crime the more like it is that the
penalti will control the behavior
two theorist name ar associ with classic criminolog the italian cesar beccaria
and the englishman jeremi bentham bentham marvel eccentr will that hi bodi
be preserv and place in the entrywai to the univers of london and brought to the
tabl when the faculti meet hi wish were carri out and the bodi can still be seen
todai by anyon visit the school
the polici implic of classic criminolog thought which ar promin todai in
theori group under the head of ration choic ar that penalti should be
establish that make the anticip result of crimin behavior less appeal than the
prospect of the loss such as the loss of freedom the theori also ha a benevol
compon in that it suggest that penalti that ar too sever serv no purpos sinc thei
ar needlessli excess for the deterr thei seek to achiev
utilitarian remain a muchfavor approach to crime with it assumpt that offend
will calcul potenti gain and loss befor thei decid to disobei the law the us
sentenc commiss propos ar base almost total on the idea of classic
criminolog mandat that monetari penalti be calcul at a level that will induc
compani to conclud that break the law is not fiscal appeal
there ar sever major difficulti inher in the theori though the first of cours is that
mani peopl do not stop and add up the gain and loss of lawbreak befor thei engag
in it second the impact of penalti can be veri differ for differ peopl the thought
of a week in prison mai be aw to on person but a piec of cake to anoth third it is
veri difficult to know whether the penalti will in fact result from the behavior most
offend optimist assum that thei will not be caught
routin activ theori
routin activ theori a variat of classic theori hold that both the motiv to
commit crime and the suppli of offend is constant there will alwai be a certain number
of peopl motiv by greed lust and other forc who inclin toward lawbreak the
determin factor particularli in predatori crime such as those involv violenc and
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4203
theft ar the activ of potenti victim there ar three import element that
influenc crime
the avail of suitabl target such as compani and individu
the absenc of capabl guardian such as auditor and secur personnel
the presenc of motiv offend such as unhappi or financi
challeng employe
biolog theori
biolog theori maintain that crimin behavior is not the result of choic the calcul of
benefit and potenti loss but rather is caus by the physic trait of those who commit
crime the foundat of biolog theori were laid by cesar lombroso an italian doctor
who insist that there were born crimin peopl who were atavist or a throwback to
more primit human type lombroso spent hi career measur the bodi of offend
and conclud that thei were mark by a high degre of asymmetri with such thing as
slope forehead and other anomali later critic would point out that lombroso us
no control groupthat is he did not measur peopl who were not crimin if he had
done so he would have found that thei share equal in those kind of trait that
lombroso presum were indic of crimin propens
biolog theori continu to flourish todai with theorist seek to locat genet
distinct between those who break the law and those who obei it in their book the bell
curv richard herrnstein and charl murrai argu that low intellig and crime ar
intim connect and that low intellig as measur by iq score is genet
transmit some scholar in the field savag the herrnsteinmurrai posit but it
receiv a good deal of media attent
biolog theorist now take a much less determinist posit than lombroso thei will
point to thi or that human characterist and sai that it given certain environment
circumst is apt to produc illeg act put anoth wai thei report that thei have
found a larg number of offend with a biolog trait but that there ar mani more that
have the trait who never get into ani troubl with the law
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4204 2011 fraud examin manual
psycholog theori
theori root in psycholog ar base on the view that crimin behavior is the product of
mental process the psychoanalyt idea of sigmund freud focu on earli childhood
develop and on unconsci motiv that is motiv of which the offend
himself is not awar freud identifi a threepart structur to human person the id the
drive for food sex and other lifesustain thing the superego the conscienc that
develop when learn valu becom incorpor into a person behavior and the ego
the i or the product of the interact between what a person want and what hi
conscienc will allow him to do to achiev what he want
cognit theori
cognit theori stress inadequ moral and intellectu develop as ly at the root of
crimin act there ar also person theori which illustr the belief that trait such as
extrovers ar respons for a signific amount of crime
integr theori
integr theori draw from choic theori biolog theori and psycholog theori on
such argument is put forward by jame q wilson and richard j herrnstein in their book
crime and human natur wilson and herrnstein maintain that while crimin activ is a
choic thi choic is heavili influenc by biolog and psycholog factor thei also
explor social factor the factor includ famili life school and gang membership
condit theori
h j eysenck work with what he call condit theori argu that the failur of a person
to incorpor satisfactorili the dictat of societi repres the major explan for
subsequ crimin behavior eysenck maintain that extrovert person both normal and
neurot ar more difficult to condit that is to trainthan introvert person and
that extrovert therefor get into more troubl than introvert
anoth psycholog theme is that frustrat is the precursor of aggress the theori
suggest that the express of aggress such as a fraud perpetr get back at hi
employ will allevi the frustrat and allow the organ to return to a more
satisfactori state
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4205
social structur theori
these theori concentr on the kind of societi that gener particular level of crime
why is crime so low in japan and so high in the unit state why do south american
countri typic have high rate of homicid while england homicid rate is rel
low there ar variou kind of sociolog theori all base on similar premis but with
differ emphas
as a group social structur theori suggest that forc oper in the lowerclass area of
the environ push mani of their resid into crimin behavior social structur
theorist challeng those who would suggest that crime is an express of psycholog
imbal biolog trait person choic etc thei argu that peopl live in equival
social environ seem to behav in a similar predict fashion
theori of anomi
strain theori ar a branch of the social structur theori strain theorist view crime as a direct
result of the frustrat and anger peopl experi over their inabl to achiev the social
and financi success thei desir the bestknown strain theori is robert merton theori of
anomi robert merton a columbia univers sociologist maintain that the discrep
between what peopl ar indoctrin into desir and the wai that ar avail to them
to achiev such end is the cornerston for explan of crimin behavior more
inform about merton is contain in the organiz crime chapter
merton theori of anomi that is normlessn ess wa deriv from the work of emil
durkheim a french sociologist who adopt the term in hi effort to explain suicid rate
among differ social group for merton anomi in the unit state wa character by
an almost overpow emphasi on the acquisit of thing and on the fact that social
statu and import is usual measur in term of monei
peopl can obtain monei and materi good merton note by conformingthat is by
work at job and engag in other legal enterpris that pai off thei can also withdraw
from the frai sai that thei will not be driven by a desir for good but will opt out of
the game that domin societi the most withdrawn often tend to be those who emploi
illeg drug to provid their satisfact then there ar the innov those who refus to
plai by the accept rule of the game but turn to outlaw method in order to accomplish
what societi ha told them that thei must achiev to be accept member
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4206 2011 fraud examin manual
social process theori
not all sociologist believ that a person social structur alon control the direct of hi
valu attitud and behavior after all most peopl who resid in even the most
deterior urban area ar lawabid citizen social process theori hold that crimin is a
function of individu social and the socialpsycholog interact peopl have
with the variou organ institut and process of societi
though thei differ in mani respect the variou social process theori all share on basic
concept all peopl regardless of their race cl ass or gender have the potenti to becom
delinqu or crimin
social learn theori
social learn theori hold that crimin behavior is a function of the wai peopl absorb
inform viewpoint and motiv from other most notabl from those with whom
thei ar close such as member of their peer group social learn theorist believ that all
peopl have the potenti to commit crime if thei ar expos to certain kind of
circumst all peopl rais in franc by french parent learn to speak that languag
pole learn to speak polish so too will a person rais with attitud that favor crimin act
respond by commit such act and the person rais and live in an environ where
crimin activ would be unthink will avoid crime inde crime might not even occur
to him as a solut to whatev problem is confront him
theori of differenti associ
the theori of differenti associ is undoubtedli the bestknown among all explan
offer in the unit state to account for crime though it too ha been wide critic on
the ground that it is just about imposs to test
the theori first appear as a systemat formul in 1939 in the third edit of edwin
h sutherland principl of criminolog later sutherland would make hi bestknown
contribut to criminolog by coin the phrase whitecollar crime and write a
monograph on the subject sutherland wa particularli interest in fraud commit by
the elit upperworld busi execut either against sharehold or the public
sutherland said gener motor doe not have an inferior complex unit state steel
doe not suffer from an unresolv oedipu problem and the dupont do not desir to
return to the womb the assumpt that an offend mai have such patholog
distort of the intellect or the emot seem to me absurd and if it is absurd regard
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4207
the crime of businessmen it is equal absurd regard the crime of person in the
econom lower class 1
the theori of differenti associ begin by assert that crimin behavior is learn
explic that idea sutherland specifi as a second point that crimin behavior is learn
in interact with other person in a process of commun if individu acquir
crimin habit or propens were expos to situat circumst and interact
total of a crimin natur it would be rel easi to comprehend how thi process of
commun oper in view of the enorm variat in standard and person to
which ani individu in our societi is expos it becom exceedingli difficult to discern
those critic element that induc crimin behavior without the intervent of some
addit principl
sutherland third point is that crimin beha vior is acquir through particip within
intim person group thi particular stress suggest that the root of crime must be
sought in the social experi of the individu unfortun the process of
social is far from be adequ understood sutherland fourth point indic
that the crimin learn process includ not onli techniqu of commit crime but also
the shape of motiv drive ration and attitud crime techniqu often
involv a high degre of skill pick pocket and not get caught demand consider
adroit and be a success prostitut demand know how to hustl custom
collect monei bui polic protect and deal with a drunken or violent john
fifth sutherland narrow hi focu by indic the kind of pressur that move the
learn process in the direct of accept of illeg pursuit care to keep within the
legal definit of behavior sutherland stipul that the specif direct of motiv and
drive is learn from definit of the legal code as favor or unfavor
and sixth he set out hi core point by establish the principl of differenti
associ accord to thi postul a person becom a crimin becaus of an excess
of definit favor to violat of the law over definit unfavor to violat of
the law then as a mean of demonstr with greater clariti the charact of associ
that have a subsequ effect on behavior sutherland state hi seventh point that
differenti associ mai vari in frequenc durat prioriti and intens but there is
1 quot in gei gilbert on whitecollar crime lexington lexington book 1982
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4208 2011 fraud examin manual
no suggest regard which of these element is apt to be more import than the
other frequent contact mai promot feel of boredom and indiffer on intens
experi mai overwhelm all prior learn or it mai not the axiom hardli help us much
in unravel the causal content of crime
sutherland eighth point concern the natur of learn and again is primarili a didact
statement of common behavior scienc understand rather than a contribut that
move the theori veri far forward learn crimin and delinqu behavior sutherland
assert involv all the mechan that ar involv in ani other learn the kei problem
is not that sutherland is wrong it is that he cast into the spotlight a theoret problem that
ha plagu student of human behavior sinc time immemori if crime is to be
understood as learn like anyth elsesai basketbal skill cook patriot and
flirtingthen ani theori that can unravel it in gredient will at the same time have to set
befor us an understand of all human action sutherland proposit can hardli
pretend to approach so stun an intellectu achiev and in thi respect can be
regard as extraordinarili overambiti or perhap simplist
as hi next to last proposit sutherland stress that learn differ from pure
imit hi last point is a worthwhil remind that while crimin behavior is an
express of gener need and valu it is not explain by these gener need and
valu becaus noncrimin behavior is an express of the same need and valu thi
injunct indic that the gener sometim emploi to account for crime
such as the view that peopl steal becaus thei crave esteem or ar greedi or kill becaus
thei ar unhappyhav littl scientif merit peopl both crimin and noncrimin ar
motiv by much the same need and valu thei becom or do not becom crimin
on the basi of their uniqu respons to common drive for prestig happi success
power wealth and numer other human aspir an individu mai feel a press
need for monei and take an extra weekend job pump ga or try to borrow from a
friend or shrug hi shoulder and figur that thi time hell do without anoth person
feel the same need mai hold up a fast food outlet
social control theori
travi hirschi in hi 1969 book caus of delinqu first articul the social control theori a
particularli import reason for the current domin of control theori as the
interpret scheme for understand crime and delinqu is that unlik theori such
as differenti associ it offer a consider number of testabl proposit such
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4209
proposit take the form of ifthen statement if someth exist or is done then it
foretel that someth will follow such formul allow for experiment test
and rebutt
control theori take it cue from a classic of sociolog emil durkheim suicid in which
the french theoretician wrote
the more weaken the group to which the individu belong the less he depend on
them the more he consequ depend on him self and recogn no other rule of conduct
than what ar found on hi privat interest durkheim 1951 p 209
essenti control theori argu that the institut of the social system train and press
those with whom thei ar in contact into pattern of conform school train for
adjust in societi peer press the etho of success and convent behavior and
parent strive to inculc lawabid habit in their youngsterseven hirschi stress
parent who themselv plai fast and loos with the rule the theori rest on the thesi that
to the extent that a person fail to becom attach to the varieti of control agenc of the
societi hi chanc of violat the law ar increas thi doctrin edg veri close to be
selfevid in it insist that close affili with lawabid peopl group and
organ is predict of lawabid behavior howev it is notabl rich with
subordin statement some of them far from obviou
four aspect of affili ar address by the theori
attach
commit
involv
belief
attach refer primarili to affectiontyp ti with peopl such as parent teacher and
peer commit refer to cost factor involv in crimin activ peopl ar commit to
convent behavior and probabl have invest someth fiscal and emotion in
their ultim success an invest that thei ar wari of risk by mean of a crimin
act commit might involv thing such as obtain a better job or see on children
succe involv concern matter such as time spent on the job that is particip in
activ relat to futur goal and object belief refer to a convict about the
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4210 2011 fraud examin manual
legitimaci of convent valu such as the law in gener and crimin justic
prescript in particular
hirschi insist that there is no import relationship between social class and delinqu
and crime thu a person in ani classlow middl or upperwho default on liaison
with the import form agenc in our societi will be more apt to find himself on a
path that end in crime among the import consider control theori stress
strongli is the bond of affect for convent person the stronger thi bond the
more like the person is to take it into account when and if he contempl a crimin act
hirschi 1969 p 83 what essenti happen the theori suggest is that peopl
confront with the possibl of behav in a lawviol manner ar like to ask of
themselv what will my wife or my mother and father think if thei find out to the
extent that individu believ that other peopl whose opinion ar import to them will
be disappoint or asham and to the extent that thei care deepli that these peopl will
feel thi wai thei will be constrain from engag in the sanction behavior
differenti reinforc theori
differenti rei nforcement theori is anoth attempt to explain crime as a type of learn behavior
it is a revis of sutherland work that in corpor element of psycholog learn
theori popular by b f skinner and the social learn theori discuss abov the
theori wa summar by ronald aker in hi 1977 work deviant behavior a social learn
approach
accord to these behavior theorist peopl learn social behavior by oper condit
behavior control by stimuli that follow the behavior behavior is reinforc when posit
reward ar gain or punish is avoid neg reinforc it is weaken by
neg stimuli punish and loss of reward neg punish whether deviant or
crimin behavior is begun or persist depend on the degre to which it ha been reward
or punish and the reward or punish attach to it altern thi is the theori of
differenti reinforc
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4301
