2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION/Psychological Theories


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Psychological Theories 
Theories rooted in psychology are based on the view that criminal behavior is the product of 
mental processes. The psychoanalytical ideas of Sigmund Freud focus on early childhood 
development and on unconscious motivations — that is, motivations of which the offender 
himself is not aware. Freud identified a three-part structure to human personality: the id (the 
drive for food, sex, and other life-sustaining things), the superego (the conscience that 
develops when learned values become incorporated into a person’s behavior), and the ego 
(the “I,” or the product of the interaction between what a person wants and what his 
conscience will allow him to do to achieve what he wants). 
 
Cognitive Theories 
Cognitive theories  stress inadequate moral and intellectual development as lying at the root of 
criminal acts. There are also personality theories, which illustrate the belief that traits such as 
extroversion are responsible for a significant amount of crime. 
 
Integrated Theories 
Integrated theories  draw from choice theory, biological theory, and psychological theory. One 
such argument is put forward by James Q. Wilson and Richard J. Herrnstein in their book 
Crime and Human Nature. Wilson and Herrnstein maintain that while criminal activity is a 
choice, this choice is heavily influenced by biological and psychological factors. They also 
explore social factors. The factors include family life, schools, and gang membership. 
 
Conditioning Theory 
H. J. Eysenck, working with what he calls conditioning theory, argues that the failure of a person 
to incorporate satisfactorily the dictates of society represents the major explanation for 
subsequent criminal behavior. Eysenck maintains that extroverted persons, both normal and 
neurotic, are more difficult to condition — that is, to train—than introverted persons, and 
that extroverts therefore get into more trouble than introverts. 
 
Another psychological theme is that frustration is the precursor of aggression. The theory 
suggests that the expression of aggression, such as a fraud perpetrator “getting back” at his 
employer, will alleviate the frustration and allow the organism to return to a more 
satisfactory state. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.205  



:


psycholog theori
theori root in psycholog ar base on the view that crimin behavior is the product of
mental process the psychoanalyt idea of sigmund freud focu on earli childhood
develop and on unconsci motiv that is motiv of which the offend
himself is not awar freud identifi a threepart structur to human person the id the
drive for food sex and other lifesustain thing the superego the conscienc that
develop when learn valu becom incorpor into a person behavior and the ego
the i or the product of the interact between what a person want and what hi
conscienc will allow him to do to achiev what he want
cognit theori
cognit theori stress inadequ moral and intellectu develop as ly at the root of
crimin act there ar also person theori which illustr the belief that trait such as
extrovers ar respons for a signific amount of crime
integr theori
integr theori draw from choic theori biolog theori and psycholog theori on
such argument is put forward by jame q wilson and richard j herrnstein in their book
crime and human natur wilson and herrnstein maintain that while crimin activ is a
choic thi choic is heavili influenc by biolog and psycholog factor thei also
explor social factor the factor includ famili life school and gang membership
condit theori
h j eysenck work with what he call condit theori argu that the failur of a person
to incorpor satisfactorili the dictat of societi repres the major explan for
subsequ crimin behavior eysenck maintain that extrovert person both normal and
neurot ar more difficult to condit that is to trainthan introvert person and
that extrovert therefor get into more troubl than introvert
anoth psycholog theme is that frustrat is the precursor of aggress the theori
suggest that the express of aggress such as a fraud perpetr get back at hi
employ will allevi the frustrat and allow the organ to return to a more
satisfactori state
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4205
