2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION/Social Process Theories


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Social Process Theories 
Not all sociologists believe that a person’s social structure alone controls the direction of his 
values, attitudes, and behavior. After all, most people who reside in even the most 
deteriorated urban areas are law-abiding citizens. Social process theories hold that criminality is a 
function of individual socialization and the social-psychological interactions people have 
with the various organizations, institutions, and processes of society. 
 
Though they differ in many respects, the various social process theories all share one basic 
concept: all people, regardless of their race, cl ass, or gender, have the potential to become 
delinquents or criminals. 
 
Social Learning Theories 
Social learning theories  hold that criminal behavior is a function of the way people absorb 
information, viewpoints, and motivations from others, most notably from those with whom 
they are close, such as members of their peer group. Social learning theorists believe that all 
people have the potential to commit crime if they are exposed to certain kinds of 
circumstances. All people raised in France by French parents learn to speak that language; 
Poles learn to speak Polish. So too will a person raised with attitudes that favor criminal acts 
respond by committing such acts, and the person raised and living in an environment where 
criminal activity would be unthinkable will avoid crime;  indeed, crime might not even occur 
to him as a solution to whatever problem is confronting him. 
 
Theory of Differential Association 
The theory of differential association is undoubtedly the best-known among all explanations 
offered in the United States to account for crime, though it too has been widely criticized on 
the grounds that it is just about impossible to test. 
 
The theory first appeared as a systematic formulation in 1939 in the third edition of Edwin 
H. Sutherland’s Principles of Criminology. Later, Sutherland would make his best-known 
contribution to criminology by coining the phrase white-collar crime  and writing a 
monograph on the subject. Sutherland was particularly interested in fraud committed by 
the elite upper-world business executive, either against shareholders or the public. 
Sutherland said, “General Motors does not have  an inferiority complex, United States Steel 
does not suffer from an unresolved Oedipus problem, and the DuPonts do not desire to 
return to the womb. The assumption that an offender may have such pathological 
distortion of the intellect or the emotions seems to me absurd, and if it is absurd regarding 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.207  
the crimes of businessmen, it is equally absurd regarding the crimes of persons in the 
economic lower classes.” 1 
 
The theory of differential association begins by asserting that criminal behavior is learned. 
Explicating that idea, Sutherland specifies as a second point that criminal behavior is learned 
in interaction with other persons in a process of communication. If individuals acquiring 
criminal habits or propensities were exposed to situations, circumstances, and interactions 
totally of a criminal nature, it would be relatively easy to comprehend how this process of 
communication operates. In view of the enormous variation in standards and personalities to 
which any individual in our society is exposed, it becomes exceedingly difficult to discern 
those critical elements that induce criminal behavior without the intervention of some 
additional principle. 
 
Sutherland’s third point is that criminal beha vior is acquired through participation within 
intimate personal groups. This particular stress suggests that the roots of crime must be 
sought in the socializing experiences of the individual. Unfortunately, the process of 
socialization is far from being adequately understood. Sutherland’s fourth point indicates 
that the criminal learning process includes not only techniques of committing crime, but also 
the shaping of motives, drives, rationalizations, and attitudes. Crime techniques often 
involve a high degree of skill; picking pockets (and not getting caught) demands considerable 
adroitness, and being a successful prostitute demands knowing how to hustle customers, 
collect money, buy police protection, and deal with a drunken or violent john. 
 
Fifth, Sutherland narrows his focus by indicating the kinds of pressures that move the 
learning process in the direction of acceptance of illegal pursuits. Careful to keep within the 
legal definitions of behavior, Sutherland stipulates that the specific direction of motives and 
drives is learned from definitions of the legal codes as favorable or unfavorable. 
 
And sixth, he sets out his core point by establishing the principle of “differential 
association.” According to this postulate, a person becomes a criminal because of an excess 
of definitions favorable to violation of the law over definitions unfavorable to violation of 
the law. Then, as a means of demonstrating with greater clarity the character of associations 
that have a subsequent effect on behavior, Sutherland states his seventh point— that 
differential association may vary in frequency, duration, priority, and intensity. But there is 
                                                 
1 Quoted in Geis, Gilbert. On White-collar Crime.  (Lexington: Lexington Books, 1982). 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.208   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
no suggestion regarding which of these elements is apt to be more important than the 
others. Frequent contacts may promote feelings of boredom and indifference; one intense 
experience may overwhelm all prior learning, or it may not. The axiom hardly helps us much 
in unraveling the causal contents of crime. 
 
Sutherland’s eighth point concerns the nature of  learning and, again, is primarily a didactic 
statement of common behavioral science understanding rather than a contribution that 
moves the theory very far forward: learning criminal and delinquent behavior, Sutherland 
asserts, involves all the mechanisms that are involved in any other learning. The key problem 
is not that Sutherland is wrong; it is that he casts into the spotlight a theoretical problem that 
has plagued students of human behavior since time immemorial. If crime is to be 
understood as learned like anything else—say, basketball skills, cooking, patriotism, and 
flirting—then any theory that can unravel its in gredients will at the same time have to set 
before us an understanding of all human action. Sutherland’s propositions can hardly 
pretend to approach so stunning an intellectual achievement, and in this respect, can be 
regarded as extraordinarily overambitious or, perhaps, simplistic. 
 
As his next to last proposition, Sutherland stresses that learning differs from pure 
imitation. His last point is a worthwhile reminder that while criminal behavior is an 
expression of general needs and values, it is not explained by these general needs and 
values because noncriminal behavior is an expression of the same needs and values. This 
injunction indicates that the generalizations sometimes employed to account for crime? 
such as the view that people steal because they crave esteem or are greedy, or kill because 
they are unhappy?have little scientific merit. People, both criminals and noncriminals, are 
motivated by much the same needs and values. They become or do not become criminals 
on the basis of their unique responses to common drives for prestige, happiness, success, 
power, wealth, and numerous other human aspirations. An individual may feel a pressing 
need for money and take an extra weekend job pumping gas, or try to borrow from a 
friend, or shrug his shoulders and figure that this time he’ll do without. Another person, 
feeling the same need, may hold up a fast food outlet. 
 
Social Control Theory  
Travis Hirschi, in his 1969 book, Causes of Delinquency, first articulated the social control theory. A 
particularly important reason for the current dominance of control theory as the 
interpretative scheme for understanding crime and delinquency is that, unlike theories such 
as differential association, it offers a considerable number of testable propositions. Such 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Theories of Crime Causation 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.209  
propositions take the form of if-then statements: if something exists or is done, then it 
foretells that something will follow. Such formulations allow for experimental testing  
and rebuttal. 
 
Control theory takes its cue from a classic of sociology, Emile Durkheim’s Suicide, in which 
the French theoretician wrote:  
 
The more weakened the groups to which [the individual belongs], the less he depends on 
them, the more he consequently depends on him self and recognizes no other rules of conduct 
than what are founded on his private interests (Durkheim, 1951, p. 209). 
 
Essentially, control theory argues that the institutions of the social system train and press 
those with whom they are in contact into patterns of conformity. Schools train for 
adjustment in society, peers press the ethos of success and conventional behavior, and 
parents strive to inculcate law-abiding habits in their youngsters—even, Hirschi stresses, 
parents who themselves play fast and loose with the rules. The theory rests on the thesis that 
to the extent that a person fails to become attached to the variety of control agencies of the 
society, his chances of violating the law are increased. This doctrine edges very close to being 
self-evident in its insistence that close affiliation with law-abiding people, groups, and 
organizations is predictive of law-abiding behavior; however, it is notably rich with 
subordinate statements, some of them far from obvious. 
 
Four aspects of affiliation are addressed by the theory:  
• Attachment 
• Commitment 
• Involvement 
• Belief  
 
Attachment  refers primarily to affection-type ties with people such as parents, teachers, and 
peers. Commitment refers to cost factors involved in criminal activity. People are committed to 
conventional behavior and probably have invested something — fiscally and emotionally — in 
their ultimate success — an investment that they are wary of risking by means of a criminal 
act. Commitment might involve things such as obtaining a better job or seeing one’s children 
succeed. Involvement concerns matters such as time spent on the job — that is, participation in 
activities related to future goals and objectives. Belief refers to a conviction about the 
Theories of Crime Causation  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.210   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
legitimacy of conventional values, such as the law in general and criminal justice 
prescriptions in particular. 
 
Hirschi insists that there is no important relationship between social class and delinquency 
and crime; thus, a person in any class—lower, middle, or upper—who defaults on liaisons 
with the important formative agencies in our society will be more apt to find himself on a 
path that ends in crime. Among the important considerations, control theory stresses 
strongly, is “the bond of affection for conventional persons.” “The stronger this bond, the 
more likely the person is to take it into account when and if he contemplates a criminal act” 
(Hirschi, 1969, p. 83). What essentially happens, the theory suggests, is that people 
confronted with the possibility of behaving in a law-violative manner are likely to ask of 
themselves: “What will my wife — or my mother and father — think if they find out?” To the 
extent that individuals believe that other people whose opinions are important to them will 
be disappointed or ashamed, and to the extent that they care deeply that these people will 
feel this way, they will be constrained from engaging in the sanctioned behavior. 
 
Differential Reinforcement Theory 
Differential rei nforcement theory  is another attempt to explain crime as a type of learned behavior. 
It is a revision of Sutherland’s work that in corporates elements of psychological learning 
theory popularized by B. F. Skinner and the social learning theory discussed above. The 
theory was summarized by Ronald Akers in his 1977 work, Deviant Behavior: A Social Learning 
Approach. 
 
According to these behavioral theorists, people learn social behavior by operant conditioning —
 behavior controlled by stimuli that follow the behavior. Behavior is reinforced when positive 
rewards are gained or punishment is avoided (negative reinforcement). It is weakened by 
negative stimuli (punishment) and loss of reward (negative punishment). Whether deviant or 
criminal behavior is begun or persists depends on the degree to which it has been rewarded 
or punished and the rewards or punishments attached to its alternatives. This is the theory of 
differential reinforcement. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.301  



:


social process theori
not all sociologist believ that a person social structur alon control the direct of hi
valu attitud and behavior after all most peopl who resid in even the most
deterior urban area ar lawabid citizen social process theori hold that crimin is a
function of individu social and the socialpsycholog interact peopl have
with the variou organ institut and process of societi
though thei differ in mani respect the variou social process theori all share on basic
concept all peopl regardless of their race cl ass or gender have the potenti to becom
delinqu or crimin
social learn theori
social learn theori hold that crimin behavior is a function of the wai peopl absorb
inform viewpoint and motiv from other most notabl from those with whom
thei ar close such as member of their peer group social learn theorist believ that all
peopl have the potenti to commit crime if thei ar expos to certain kind of
circumst all peopl rais in franc by french parent learn to speak that languag
pole learn to speak polish so too will a person rais with attitud that favor crimin act
respond by commit such act and the person rais and live in an environ where
crimin activ would be unthink will avoid crime inde crime might not even occur
to him as a solut to whatev problem is confront him
theori of differenti associ
the theori of differenti associ is undoubtedli the bestknown among all explan
offer in the unit state to account for crime though it too ha been wide critic on
the ground that it is just about imposs to test
the theori first appear as a systemat formul in 1939 in the third edit of edwin
h sutherland principl of criminolog later sutherland would make hi bestknown
contribut to criminolog by coin the phrase whitecollar crime and write a
monograph on the subject sutherland wa particularli interest in fraud commit by
the elit upperworld busi execut either against sharehold or the public
sutherland said gener motor doe not have an inferior complex unit state steel
doe not suffer from an unresolv oedipu problem and the dupont do not desir to
return to the womb the assumpt that an offend mai have such patholog
distort of the intellect or the emot seem to me absurd and if it is absurd regard
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4207
the crime of businessmen it is equal absurd regard the crime of person in the
econom lower class 1
the theori of differenti associ begin by assert that crimin behavior is learn
explic that idea sutherland specifi as a second point that crimin behavior is learn
in interact with other person in a process of commun if individu acquir
crimin habit or propens were expos to situat circumst and interact
total of a crimin natur it would be rel easi to comprehend how thi process of
commun oper in view of the enorm variat in standard and person to
which ani individu in our societi is expos it becom exceedingli difficult to discern
those critic element that induc crimin behavior without the intervent of some
addit principl
sutherland third point is that crimin beha vior is acquir through particip within
intim person group thi particular stress suggest that the root of crime must be
sought in the social experi of the individu unfortun the process of
social is far from be adequ understood sutherland fourth point indic
that the crimin learn process includ not onli techniqu of commit crime but also
the shape of motiv drive ration and attitud crime techniqu often
involv a high degre of skill pick pocket and not get caught demand consider
adroit and be a success prostitut demand know how to hustl custom
collect monei bui polic protect and deal with a drunken or violent john
fifth sutherland narrow hi focu by indic the kind of pressur that move the
learn process in the direct of accept of illeg pursuit care to keep within the
legal definit of behavior sutherland stipul that the specif direct of motiv and
drive is learn from definit of the legal code as favor or unfavor
and sixth he set out hi core point by establish the principl of differenti
associ accord to thi postul a person becom a crimin becaus of an excess
of definit favor to violat of the law over definit unfavor to violat of
the law then as a mean of demonstr with greater clariti the charact of associ
that have a subsequ effect on behavior sutherland state hi seventh point that
differenti associ mai vari in frequenc durat prioriti and intens but there is
1 quot in gei gilbert on whitecollar crime lexington lexington book 1982
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4208 2011 fraud examin manual
no suggest regard which of these element is apt to be more import than the
other frequent contact mai promot feel of boredom and indiffer on intens
experi mai overwhelm all prior learn or it mai not the axiom hardli help us much
in unravel the causal content of crime
sutherland eighth point concern the natur of learn and again is primarili a didact
statement of common behavior scienc understand rather than a contribut that
move the theori veri far forward learn crimin and delinqu behavior sutherland
assert involv all the mechan that ar involv in ani other learn the kei problem
is not that sutherland is wrong it is that he cast into the spotlight a theoret problem that
ha plagu student of human behavior sinc time immemori if crime is to be
understood as learn like anyth elsesai basketbal skill cook patriot and
flirtingthen ani theori that can unravel it in gredient will at the same time have to set
befor us an understand of all human action sutherland proposit can hardli
pretend to approach so stun an intellectu achiev and in thi respect can be
regard as extraordinarili overambiti or perhap simplist
as hi next to last proposit sutherland stress that learn differ from pure
imit hi last point is a worthwhil remind that while crimin behavior is an
express of gener need and valu it is not explain by these gener need and
valu becaus noncrimin behavior is an express of the same need and valu thi
injunct indic that the gener sometim emploi to account for crime
such as the view that peopl steal becaus thei crave esteem or ar greedi or kill becaus
thei ar unhappyhav littl scientif merit peopl both crimin and noncrimin ar
motiv by much the same need and valu thei becom or do not becom crimin
on the basi of their uniqu respons to common drive for prestig happi success
power wealth and numer other human aspir an individu mai feel a press
need for monei and take an extra weekend job pump ga or try to borrow from a
friend or shrug hi shoulder and figur that thi time hell do without anoth person
feel the same need mai hold up a fast food outlet
social control theori
travi hirschi in hi 1969 book caus of delinqu first articul the social control theori a
particularli import reason for the current domin of control theori as the
interpret scheme for understand crime and delinqu is that unlik theori such
as differenti associ it offer a consider number of testabl proposit such
fraud prevent and deterr theori of crime causat
2011 fraud examin manual 4209
proposit take the form of ifthen statement if someth exist or is done then it
foretel that someth will follow such formul allow for experiment test
and rebutt
control theori take it cue from a classic of sociolog emil durkheim suicid in which
the french theoretician wrote
the more weaken the group to which the individu belong the less he depend on
them the more he consequ depend on him self and recogn no other rule of conduct
than what ar found on hi privat interest durkheim 1951 p 209
essenti control theori argu that the institut of the social system train and press
those with whom thei ar in contact into pattern of conform school train for
adjust in societi peer press the etho of success and convent behavior and
parent strive to inculc lawabid habit in their youngsterseven hirschi stress
parent who themselv plai fast and loos with the rule the theori rest on the thesi that
to the extent that a person fail to becom attach to the varieti of control agenc of the
societi hi chanc of violat the law ar increas thi doctrin edg veri close to be
selfevid in it insist that close affili with lawabid peopl group and
organ is predict of lawabid behavior howev it is notabl rich with
subordin statement some of them far from obviou
four aspect of affili ar address by the theori
attach
commit
involv
belief
attach refer primarili to affectiontyp ti with peopl such as parent teacher and
peer commit refer to cost factor involv in crimin activ peopl ar commit to
convent behavior and probabl have invest someth fiscal and emotion in
their ultim success an invest that thei ar wari of risk by mean of a crimin
act commit might involv thing such as obtain a better job or see on children
succe involv concern matter such as time spent on the job that is particip in
activ relat to futur goal and object belief refer to a convict about the
theori of crime causat fraud prevent and deterr
4210 2011 fraud examin manual
legitimaci of convent valu such as the law in gener and crimin justic
prescript in particular
hirschi insist that there is no import relationship between social class and delinqu
and crime thu a person in ani classlow middl or upperwho default on liaison
with the import form agenc in our societi will be more apt to find himself on a
path that end in crime among the import consider control theori stress
strongli is the bond of affect for convent person the stronger thi bond the
more like the person is to take it into account when and if he contempl a crimin act
hirschi 1969 p 83 what essenti happen the theori suggest is that peopl
confront with the possibl of behav in a lawviol manner ar like to ask of
themselv what will my wife or my mother and father think if thei find out to the
extent that individu believ that other peopl whose opinion ar import to them will
be disappoint or asham and to the extent that thei care deepli that these peopl will
feel thi wai thei will be constrain from engag in the sanction behavior
differenti reinforc theori
differenti rei nforcement theori is anoth attempt to explain crime as a type of learn behavior
it is a revis of sutherland work that in corpor element of psycholog learn
theori popular by b f skinner and the social learn theori discuss abov the
theori wa summar by ronald aker in hi 1977 work deviant behavior a social learn
approach
accord to these behavior theorist peopl learn social behavior by oper condit
behavior control by stimuli that follow the behavior behavior is reinforc when posit
reward ar gain or punish is avoid neg reinforc it is weaken by
neg stimuli punish and loss of reward neg punish whether deviant or
crimin behavior is begun or persist depend on the degre to which it ha been reward
or punish and the reward or punish attach to it altern thi is the theori of
differenti reinforc
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4301
