2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Objectives


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Objectives 
According to Paul O’Connell in an article for Security Management, one of the first steps in 
initiating an undercover operation is to identify the objectives of the investigation. The 
objectives must specifically identify what the operation is designed to discover, such as the 
identity of the fraudulent worker responsible for a specific crime. 
 
The specific objectives of a covert operation depend on the type of investigation being 
conducted. The objectives in the surveillance of a warehouse would not be the same as those 
in surveillance designed to determine if Collins is receiving a kickback from Nagel. However, 
all covert operations have similar general objectives: 
• To obtain evidence of a past, current, or future crime. This evidence usually bears on the 
culpability of individuals. If an operative in a covert investigation is posing as a thief, for 
example, actual thieves might confess their involvement to him, unaware that their 
conversations were being recorded. 
• To identify those engaged in possible illegal activity. If, for example, cash is missing, a covert 
investigation or surveillance might disclose who is committing the offense. Thereafter, 
the covert operation might be discontinued, and the evidence gathered by more 
traditional means.  
• To recover illegal gains. If an accounts payable clerk has been stealing to purchase an 
automobile, locating the car might permit civil litigation to recover it.  
• To identify co-conspirators. If an employee is in collusion with another employee, a covert 
operation might lead to the identity of the second individual.  
                                                 
1 O’Connell, E. Paul. “Is a Ruse the Best Route?” Security Management. December 1995, pp. 26-30. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To identify the modus operandi. Again, in the case of missing goods, the identity of the 
perpetrator might be known or suspected, but the internal control deficiencies 
permitting the theft might be unknown. A covert operation might discover the  
missing link. 
 
 



:


object
accord to paul oconnel in an articl for secur manag on of the first step in
initi an undercov oper is to identifi the object of the investig the
object must specif identifi what the oper is design to discov such as the
ident of the fraudul worker respons for a specif crime
the specif object of a covert oper depend on the type of investig be
conduct the object in the surveil of a warehous would not be the same as those
in surveil design to determin if collin is receiv a kickback from nagel howev
all covert oper have similar gener object
to obtain evid of a past current or futur crime thi evid usual bear on the
culpabl of individu if an oper in a covert investig is pose as a thief for
exampl actual thiev might confess their involv to him unawar that their
convers were be record
to identifi those engag in possibl illeg activ if for exampl cash is miss a covert
investig or surveil might disclos who is commit the offens thereaft
the covert oper might be discontinu and the evid gather by more
tradit mean
to recov illeg gain if an account payabl clerk ha been steal to purchas an
automobil locat the car might permit civil litig to recov it
to identifi coconspir if an employe is in collus with anoth employe a covert
oper might lead to the ident of the second individu
1 oconnel e paul is a ruse the best rout secur manag decemb 1995 pp 2630
covert examin investig
3304 2011 fraud examin manual
to identifi the modu operandi again in the case of miss good the ident of the
perpetr might be known or suspect but the intern control defici
permit the theft might be unknown a covert oper might discov the
miss link
