2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Entrapment


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Entrapment 
Entrapment occurs when law enforcement officers or government agents induce a person to 
commit a crime that he is not previously disposed to commit. Entrapment poses the biggest 
legal problem in covert operations, particularly in undercover operations. It is imperative 
that the operation be properly predicated. Again, covert operations must not be used for 
“fishing expeditions.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
A store owner was concerned because his inventory costs were unusually high in relation to sales. 
He hired a private investigator to pose as a cont ract driver and deliver and pick up merchandise 
to and from the store. The investigator proceeded to offer kickbacks to all employees in the 
shipping department if they would allow him to leave without si gning for the merchandise. One 
employee took the bait, and was subsequently arrested for theft. The case was thrown out 
because of entrapment. The courts ruled that there was no reason to believe, simply because of a 
high sales cost, that merchandise was being stolen. Furthermore, the investigator had no suspect 
in mind; he was simply “fishing.”  
 
 



:


entrap
entrap occur when law enforc offic or govern agent induc a person to
commit a crime that he is not previous dispos to commit entrap pose the biggest
legal problem in covert oper particularli in undercov oper it is imper
that the oper be properli predic again covert oper must not be us for
fish expedit
exampl
a store owner wa concern becaus hi inventori cost were unusu high in relat to sale
he hire a privat investig to pose as a cont ract driver and deliv and pick up merchandis
to and from the store the investig proceed to offer kickback to all employe in the
ship depart if thei would allow him to leav without si gning for the merchandis on
employe took the bait and wa subsequ arrest for theft the case wa thrown out
becaus of entrap the court rule that there wa no reason to believ simpli becaus of a
high sale cost that merchandis wa be stolen furthermor the investig had no suspect
in mind he wa simpli fish
