2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Surveillance 
Surveillance is the planned observation of people, places, or objects. It is normally 
concerned with people. Places and objects observed are usually incidental to the primary 
interest of gathering information about certain people. 
 
There are two general types of surveillance: mobile and fixed. Mobile surveillance is 
sometimes referred to as “tailing” or “shadowing ,” and fixed surveillance as a “stakeout” or 
“plant.” Mobile surveillance can be done on foot or by vehicle and is carried out when 
people being observed move from location to location. A fixed surveillance is used when a 
person or activity remains in place, although the observers might move from one vantage 
point to another in the immediate area. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Surveillance, whether by foot or vehicle, is predominantly an exercise in common sense, 
skill, tact, and ingenuity on the part of the observer. Carefully planned and properly executed 
surveillance can be of tremendous value in an investigation; conversely, lack of preparation, 
poor timing, and unsound surveillance practices can destroy an otherwise good case. 
 
Surveillance can be used to locate residences, businesses, or other places of interest to  
the investigation, and places where criminal activity is conducted. It can also produce 
important evidence concerning the scope and nature of a person’s activities. Surveillance 
activities must be carefully recorded. Detailed notes and logs, film and video (often with 
special lenses and light sources), tape recordings, and miniature electronic listening devices 
must be used appropriately. 
 



:


surveil
surveil is the plan observ of peopl place or object it is normal
concern with peopl place and object observ ar usual incident to the primari
interest of gather inform about certain peopl
there ar two gener type of surveil mobil and fix mobil surveil is
sometim refer to as tail or shadow and fix surveil as a stakeout or
plant mobil surveil can be done on foot or by vehicl and is carri out when
peopl be observ move from locat to locat a fix surveil is us when a
person or activ remain in place although the observ might move from on vantag
point to anoth in the immedi area
covert examin investig
3306 2011 fraud examin manual
surveil whether by foot or vehicl is predominantli an exercis in common sens
skill tact and ingenu on the part of the observ carefulli plan and properli execut
surveil can be of tremend valu in an investig convers lack of prepar
poor time and unsound surveil practic can destroi an otherwis good case
surveil can be us to locat resid busi or other place of interest to
the investig and place where crimin activ is conduct it can also produc
import evid concern the scope and natur of a person activ surveil
activ must be carefulli record detail note and log film and video often with
special lens and light sourc tape record and miniatur electron listen devic
must be us appropri
