2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance/Preparation


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Preparation 
The observer’s attire should fit in with the ar ea and/or group. Dress should be conservative, 
unless conservative dress is not appropriate for the area. Attire should not be loud or flashy 
so that if the subject notes the observer, he will be less likely to form any lasting impression. 
Minor changes in outer clothing or hand-carried  items might alter the overall impression and 
help prevent recognition by the subject. 
 
Two or more observers working together need complete agreement about the surveillance 
techniques and schedule. Discreet signals will help each observer understand any given 
situation. Planning is essential, but the observers’ adaptability and ingenuity are vital. 
Observers should be chosen for both aptitude and resourcefulness. They must have poise, 
patience, and endurance. Prior to the surveillance, the observer should prepare and 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.307 
document a cover story that will stand up under scrutiny. This cover story should provide 
the observer with a reasonable excuse for being in the area and for doing what has to be 
done there. 
 



:


prepar
the observ attir should fit in with the ar ea andor group dress should be conserv
unless conserv dress is not appropri for the area attir should not be loud or flashi
so that if the subject note the observ he will be less like to form ani last impress
minor chang in outer cloth or handcarri item might alter the overal impress and
help prevent recognit by the subject
two or more observ work togeth need complet agreement about the surveil
techniqu and schedul discreet signal will help each observ understand ani given
situat plan is essenti but the observ adapt and ingenu ar vital
observ should be chosen for both aptitud and resourc thei must have pois
patienc and endur prior to the surveil the observ should prepar and
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3307
document a cover stori that will stand up under scrutini thi cover stori should provid
the observ with a reason excus for be in the area and for do what ha to be
done there
