2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance/One-Person Surveillance


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


One-Person Surveillance 
One-person surveillance is best for a fixed sur veillance. If a moving one-person surveillance 
must be used, the observer should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep 
fairly close. Crowd and street conditions will dictate the appropriate distance. When the 
subject turns a corner in an uncrowded area the observer should continue crossing the 
intersecting street. By glancing up the street in the subject’s direction, the subject’s position 
and actions can be noted. 
 
In a crowded area, surveillance distances might be decreased. Unless the subject is standing 
just around the corner, surveillance can be continued from the same side of the street. Do 
not turn a corner immediately behind the subject. When operating across the street from the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject, circumstances will dictate whether to operate forward, to the rear, or abreast of the 
target. The observer should be abreast of the target when he turns a corner to observe any 
contact with individuals or entry into a building. 
 



:


oneperson surveil
oneperson surveil is best for a fix sur veillanc if a move oneperson surveil
must be us the observ should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep
fairli close crowd and street condit will dictat the appropri distanc when the
subject turn a corner in an uncrowd area the observ should continu cross the
intersect street by glanc up the street in the subject direct the subject posit
and action can be note
in a crowd area surveil distanc might be decreas unless the subject is stand
just around the corner surveil can be continu from the same side of the street do
not turn a corner immedi behind the subject when oper across the street from the
covert examin investig
3308 2011 fraud examin manual
subject circumst will dictat whether to oper forward to the rear or abreast of the
target the observ should be abreast of the target when he turn a corner to observ ani
contact with individu or entri into a build
