2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance/Satellite Surveillance


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Satellite Surveillance 
Although fraud examiners will rarely need it, satellite data are now available. For a relatively 
small amount, an examiner can buy detailed images from nearly anywhere in the world. 
 
Plant security lends itself to satellite imagery. In addition to providing much of the same 
information as conventional satellite photographs, multispectral imagery can detect muddy 
ground, paths taken by people and vehicles, and other information that might help identify 
potential security problems. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.311 
Satellite imagery can be useful in surveillance if it is combined with more traditional types of 
photographic intelligence. This is especially true for large estates or industrial sites where 
aerial photography is prohibited. It also can be beneficial in a covert operation. 
 
Satellite imagery can help to determine ways to penetrate a site, develop a map of the 
grounds, and identify important areas. In addition, satellite imagery can be used to 
investigate areas that are too remote, expensive, or dangerous to send operatives. 
 
Buying satellite imagery is simple if the latitude and longitude of the target is known. The 
products range from photographic prints of the image to magnetic tapes of geographically 
corrected data. Prints, not much different from the enlargements from a film processor, are 
usually the cheapest product. While they don’t allow sophisticated enhancement, they only 
require a magnifying glass to examine.  
 
The next most expensive product is a transparency or a negative. It allows the interpreter to 
make prints and is convenient for exhibiting with an overhead projector. Stereograms are 
pairs of images that show the same object from slightly different positions and provide a 
three-dimensional view when looked at with stereoscopic glasses. They are available as either 
prints or transparencies. Magnetic tape is the digitized version of the images. A particularly 
sophisticated analysis of the target is possible with magnetic tape. 
 



:


satellit surveil
although fraud examin will rare need it satellit data ar now avail for a rel
small amount an examin can bui detail imag from nearli anywher in the world
plant secur lend itself to satellit imageri in addit to provid much of the same
inform as convent satellit photograph multispectr imageri can detect muddi
ground path taken by peopl and vehicl and other inform that might help identifi
potenti secur problem
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3311
satellit imageri can be us in surveil if it is combin with more tradit type of
photograph intellig thi is especi true for larg estat or industri site where
aerial photographi is prohibit it also can be benefici in a covert oper
satellit imageri can help to determin wai to penetr a site develop a map of the
ground and identifi import area in addit satellit imageri can be us to
investig area that ar too remot expens or danger to send oper
bui satellit imageri is simpl if the latitud and longitud of the target is known the
product rang from photograph print of the imag to magnet tape of geograph
correct data print not much differ from the enlarg from a film processor ar
usual the cheapest product while thei dont allow sophist enhanc thei onli
requir a magnifi glass to examin
the next most expens product is a transpar or a neg it allow the interpret to
make print and is conveni for exhibit with an overhead projector stereogram ar
pair of imag that show the same object from slightli differ posit and provid a
threedimension view when look at with stereoscop glass thei ar avail as either
print or transpar magnet tape is the digit version of the imag a particularli
sophist analysi of the target is possibl with magnet tape
