2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants/Reporting Contacts


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Reporting Contacts 
It is recommended that all contact with informants and sources be reported on a 
memorandum of interview, although the confidential source or informant’s identity should 
not be included in the report. Symbols to denote the informant’s identity should be used. It 
is further recommended that sources be preceded with an “S” followed by a unique identifier 
(i.e., source #1 would be “S-1”; source #2 would be “S-2”). The symbols for informants 
would then be “I-1” and “I-2.”  
 
As a general rule, disclosure of the identities of sources and informants should be on a strict 
need-to-know basis. For that reason, the person’s identity should be maintained in a secure 
file with limited access and cross-indexed by his symbol number. The reliability of the 
source, if known, and whether the person is in a position to furnish relevant information 
should both be noted in writing. 
 
 EXAMPLE 
“A source of unknown reliability, but in a position to furnish relevant  
information (hereinafter referred to as S-1), advised as follows:” 
OR 
“An informant of known reliability and in a position to furnish relevant information 
(hereinafter referred to as I-2) advised as follows:” 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.318   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The fraud examiner is not in a position to promise leniency to people involved in the 
commission of a crime or tort. To do so is serious misconduct and a violation of the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics. Promises of leniency can only 
come from the prosecutor or the courts. The examiner might truthfully tell the informant 
that his cooperation will be made known to the authorities, and that people who cooperate 
are generally treated better.  
 
For reasons previously discussed, it is best not to use sources and informants in ongoing 
crimes as “double agents.” Such action is inherently risky and places the examiner in the 
position of having to defend the actions of the source or informant, actions that, in most 
cases, the examiner cannot control. This leaves the case open to attack during legal 
proceedings. If it appears critical that the source be used as an agent, get the approval of the 
prosecutor and/or attorney before proceeding.  
 



:


report contact
it is recommend that all contact with inform and sourc be report on a
memorandum of interview although the confidenti sourc or inform ident should
not be includ in the report symbol to denot the inform ident should be us it
is further recommend that sourc be preced with an s follow by a uniqu identifi
ie sourc 1 would be s1 sourc 2 would be s2 the symbol for inform
would then be i1 and i2
as a gener rule disclosur of the ident of sourc and inform should be on a strict
needtoknow basi for that reason the person ident should be maintain in a secur
file with limit access and crossindex by hi symbol number the reliabl of the
sourc if known and whether the person is in a posit to furnish relev inform
should both be note in write
exampl
a sourc of unknown reliabl but in a posit to furnish relev
inform hereinaft refer to as s1 advis as follow
or
an inform of known reliabl and in a posit to furnish relev inform
hereinaft refer to as i2 advis as follow
covert examin investig
3318 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud examin is not in a posit to promis lenienc to peopl involv in the
commiss of a crime or tort to do so is seriou misconduct and a violat of the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic promis of lenienc can onli
come from the prosecutor or the court the examin might truthfulli tell the inform
that hi cooper will be made known to the author and that peopl who cooper
ar gener treat better
for reason previous discuss it is best not to us sourc and inform in ongo
crime as doubl agent such action is inher riski and place the examin in the
posit of have to defend the action of the sourc or inform action that in most
case the examin cannot control thi leav the case open to attack dure legal
proceed if it appear critic that the sourc be us as an agent get the approv of the
prosecutor andor attornei befor proceed
