2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud/Construction Loans/ESTIMATES OF COSTS TO COMPLETE


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


ESTIMATES OF COSTS TO COMPLETE 
When borrowers approach a lending institution for construction financing they typically 
have a development plan, complete with an engineering report, appraisal, and budget for 
construction costs. The construction cost budget is, by definition, an estimate. As the project 
is built out, the budget will be revised to reflect actual expenses. Budgets are delineated by 
specific line item, such as slab, exterior glass, grading, landscaping, and tenant 
improvements. As the project proceeds, certain over- and underbudget costs are incurred. 
These costs should be represented by a change order. 
 
If the loan agreement has been properly documented and enforced, no material 
differentiation from the budget should occur without the lender’s knowledge and consent. 
However, the developer/borrower might misrepresent the true nature of the under- or 
overbudget amount to mislead the lender. The architect/engineer and the lender’s inspector 
should examine all budget changes. The impact of change orders might result in the loan 
becoming out of balance (cost to complete exceeds available loan and equity funds). 
Generally, developers hide or conceal their overbudget construction costs in two common 
places. The first place is contingency and the second is to remove allocations from tenant 
improvements and apply them to shell construction. 
 
Most budgets contain a contingency line item in  the event actual costs exceed the budgeted 
amounts. Unfortunately, many developers and lenders do not monitor the total impact on 
removing allocations from the contingency budget. In addition, savings are not allocated to 
the contingency line item when underbudget costs are realized. It is also common to rob one 
account to make up for a shortfall in another account. Generally, tenant finish is estimated at 
a particular dollar amount per square foot. This allows the developer considerable latitude in 
negotiating with tenants. 
 
However, before the entire space has been leased, and the construction costs have been 
incurred, the amount allocated to tenant improvements remains budgetary. If the developer 
is allowed to reallocate amounts from this budget line to shell construction, then when it 
comes time to negotiate leases and finish out the space, the developer might be short of 
available funds. If the tenant finish is treated as a hold-back and not to be reallocated or 
disbursed except for its intended purpose, then there is a greater chance of the loan not 
becoming over-disbursed (cost to complete exceeding the available financing). 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.906                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


estim of cost to complet
when borrow approach a lend institut for construct financ thei typic
have a develop plan complet with an engin report apprais and budget for
construct cost the construct cost budget is by definit an estim as the project
is built out the budget will be revis to reflect actual expens budget ar delin by
specif line item such as slab exterior glass grade landscap and tenant
improv as the project proce certain over and underbudget cost ar incur
these cost should be repres by a chang order
if the loan agreement ha been properli document and enforc no materi
differenti from the budget should occur without the lender knowledg and consent
howev the developerborrow might misrepres the true natur of the under or
overbudget amount to mislead the lender the architectengin and the lender inspector
should examin all budget chang the impact of chang order might result in the loan
becom out of balanc cost to complet exce avail loan and equiti fund
gener develop hide or conceal their overbudget construct cost in two common
place the first place is conting and the second is to remov alloc from tenant
improv and appli them to shell construct
most budget contain a conting line item in the event actual cost exce the budget
amount unfortun mani develop and lender do not monitor the total impact on
remov alloc from the conting budget in addit save ar not alloc to
the conting line item when underbudget cost ar realiz it is also common to rob on
account to make up for a shortfal in anoth account gener tenant finish is estim at
a particular dollar amount per squar foot thi allow the develop consider latitud in
negoti with tenant
howev befor the entir space ha been leas and the construct cost have been
incur the amount alloc to tenant improv remain budgetari if the develop
is allow to realloc amount from thi budget line to shell construct then when it
come time to negoti leas and finish out the space the develop might be short of
avail fund if the tenant finish is treat as a holdback and not to be realloc or
disburs except for it intend purpos then there is a greater chanc of the loan not
becom overdisburs cost to complet exceed the avail financ
financi institut fraud financi transact
1906 2011 fraud examin manual
