2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud/Missing Documentation/DRAW REQUESTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


DRAW REQUESTS 
• Draw request form (AIA Form or its equivalent). 
• Bank reconciliation (general contractor disbursement account). 
• Canceled checks (if general contractor pays subcontractors, copies of the canceled 
checks should be included in the following draw). 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector). 
• Lien releases for each subcontractor for the previous draw 
• Loan balancing form (the lender should prepare some form of reconciliation to ensure 
that with each draw the loan remains in balance. Items of particular concern are interest, 
tenant finish, and retainage.) 
• Receipts (for all items submitted on the draw request form). 
• Title updates from the title company. 
• Wire transfer instructions (from the lender to the general contractor’s disbursement 
account. 
 
In addition to the normal loan files, the lender should require a continuing report from the 
borrower. For example, the borrower could be required to report annual financial condition 
coupled with a tax return. Missing documents in  these follow-up files might indicate that the 
project or the borrower is having difficulty that might be the result of a fraud scheme. 
 



:


draw request
draw request form aia form or it equival
bank reconcili gener contractor disburs account
cancel check if gener contractor pai subcontractor copi of the cancel
check should be includ in the follow draw
inspect report lender inspector
lien releas for each subcontractor for the previou draw
loan balanc form the lender should prepar some form of reconcili to ensur
that with each draw the loan remain in balanc item of particular concern ar interest
tenant finish and retainag
receipt for all item submit on the draw request form
titl updat from the titl compani
wire transfer instruct from the lender to the gener contractor disburs
account
in addit to the normal loan file the lender should requir a continu report from the
borrow for exampl the borrow could be requir to report annual financi condit
coupl with a tax return miss document in these followup file might indic that the
project or the borrow is have difficulti that might be the result of a fraud scheme
