2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud/Disguised Transactions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Disguised Transactions 
Transactions disguised to conceal their true nature often involve the lender and either an 
existing customer or new customer. Banking personnel will sometimes engage in fraudulent 
schemes to forego the requirement to record additional loan loss reserves. One method 
employed is to “sell” OREO (Other Real Estate  Owned) property to an existing customer or 
a new customer in exchange for making a new loan on another unrelated project. In other 
words, the bank is tying one transaction to another, quid pro quo. 
 
Another method of concealing the true nature of a transaction is to conduct the transaction 
through nominees. For example, the bank might be required to recognize an additional loan 
loss reserve due to the lack of performance on a particular loan. The borrower might or 
might not be a good customer of the bank. Regardless of the status of the customer, the 
bank might request that the project (underlying collateral) be sold to another party, the 
financing to be arranged by the bank. The borrower can form a new entity (nominee or shell 
company) to purchase the property; a new (generally higher) appraisal is obtained and the 
property is sold. In this illustration, the avoidance of loss required the participation of the 
bank personnel, the borrower, and the appraiser. 
 
 



:


disguis transact
transact disguis to conceal their true natur often involv the lender and either an
exist custom or new custom bank personnel will sometim engag in fraudul
scheme to forego the requir to record addit loan loss reserv on method
emploi is to sell oreo other real estat own properti to an exist custom or
a new custom in exchang for make a new loan on anoth unrel project in other
word the bank is ty on transact to anoth quid pro quo
anoth method of conceal the true natur of a transact is to conduct the transact
through nomine for exampl the bank might be requir to recogn an addit loan
loss reserv due to the lack of perform on a particular loan the borrow might or
might not be a good custom of the bank regardless of the statu of the custom the
bank might request that the project underli collater be sold to anoth parti the
financ to be arrang by the bank the borrow can form a new entiti nomine or shell
compani to purchas the properti a new gener higher apprais is obtain and the
properti is sold in thi illustr the avoid of loss requir the particip of the
bank personnel the borrow and the apprais
