2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Real Estate Fraud/Valuation Methods/THE COST APPROACH


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


THE COST APPROACH 
The cost approach generally does not exert much influence on the appraiser’s final value 
estimate. It serves as a “benchmark” against which the sales comparison and income 
approaches are measured. The cost approach is more accurate for new properties. It views 
the value of a parcel as the combination of the land value if vacant and the cost to construct 
a new building on the given date, less the accrued depreciation the existing building would 
suffer in comparison with the new building. 
 
The cost approach has five steps: 
• Estimate the land value as though vacant and available for development to its highest 
and best use. (Use the sales comparison approach.) 
• Estimate the replacement or reproduction cost of the existing improvements as of the 
appraisal date. 
• Estimate the accrued depreciation amount suffered by the improvements from all causes 
(physical deterioration and/or functional or external obsolescence). 
• Deduct the accrued depreciation from the replacement cost to find the estimate of value 
of the depreciated improvements. 
• Add the improvements’ depreciated value to the land value to arrive at the value of the 
property. 
 
The above is the most frequently used cost approach method. It involves the cost associated 
with rebuilding with modern methods, design, and materials that would most exactly replace 
the existing building. Reproduction cost is a cost-approach used to estimate the cost to 
reconstruct a replica of the building. It generally is used only when dealing with unique 
construction or for testimony in court. 
 



:


the cost approach
the cost approach gener doe not exert much influenc on the apprais final valu
estim it serv as a benchmark against which the sale comparison and incom
approach ar measur the cost approach is more accur for new properti it view
the valu of a parcel as the combin of the land valu if vacant and the cost to construct
a new build on the given date less the accru depreci the exist build would
suffer in comparison with the new build
the cost approach ha five step
estim the land valu as though vacant and avail for develop to it highest
and best us us the sale comparison approach
estim the replac or reproduct cost of the exist improv as of the
apprais date
estim the accru depreci amount suffer by the improv from all caus
physic deterior andor function or extern obsolesc
deduct the accru depreci from the replac cost to find the estim of valu
of the depreci improv
add the improv depreci valu to the land valu to arriv at the valu of the
properti
the abov is the most frequent us cost approach method it involv the cost associ
with rebuild with modern method design and materi that would most exactli replac
the exist build reproduct cost is a costapproach us to estim the cost to
reconstruct a replica of the build it gener is us onli when deal with uniqu
construct or for testimoni in court
