2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Equity Skimming


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Equity Skimming 
Equity skimming is a scheme whereby an individual, entity, or group of individuals purchases 
one or several single-family homes. Typically, the financing is for a percentage of the 
purchase price (e.g., 80–90 percent) and the owner invests the balance of the purchase price 
as equity. The home(s) is/are then rented. 
 
The owners collect the rent from the tenants but fail to make the mortgage payment(s). 
When owners have withheld mortgage payments that equal the amount of the invested 
equity, they can then either resume payments or allow the mortgage to be foreclosed. 
Although the mortgage might eventually be foreclosed, the owners have recouped their 
original investment plus any rental payments not applied to the mortgage. In addition, the 
owners received state and federal tax benefits during the holding period. This scheme is 
most successful with non-recourse mortgages. 
 
Although equity skimming eventually collapses and the purchasers risk being sued for 
deficiencies (if the loans were recourse), the scheme continues to be practiced. It has become 
an increasing problem as many residential homes are auctioned and bulk purchases are 
encouraged. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.923 



:


equiti skim
equiti skim is a scheme wherebi an individu entiti or group of individu purchas
on or sever singlefamili home typic the financ is for a percentag of the
purchas price eg 8090 percent and the owner invest the balanc of the purchas price
as equiti the home isar then rent
the owner collect the rent from the tenant but fail to make the mortgag payment
when owner have withheld mortgag payment that equal the amount of the invest
equiti thei can then either resum payment or allow the mortgag to be foreclos
although the mortgag might eventu be foreclos the owner have recoup their
origin invest plu ani rental payment not appli to the mortgag in addit the
owner receiv state and feder tax benefit dure the hold period thi scheme is
most success with nonrecours mortgag
although equiti skim eventu collaps and the purchas risk be su for
defici if the loan were recours the scheme continu to be practic it ha becom
an increas problem as mani residenti home ar auction and bulk purchas ar
encourag
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1923
