2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Builder-Bailout Schemes/A SCHEME INVOLVING A STRAW BORROWER


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


A SCHEME INVOLVING A STRAW BORROWER 
Other builders seek straw borrowers who are often induced with no-risk investment 
property ownership. Sometimes, the straw borrower is affiliated with the builder. In another 
variation of this scheme, the builder fails to complete construction but obtains a straw 
borrower and an inflated appraisal to originate a loan. 
 
A builder bailout scheme involving a straw borrower may play out as follows: 
• The builder recruits a straw borrower to purchase the property for no money down and 
cash back at closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal that is used as a basis for the loan amount. This 
inflated loan amount will allow the builder to recoup his expenses, pay a fee to the straw, 
and keep the loan current for two to four years. This might appear on the HUD-1 
statement as a disproportionate commission to a real estate agent (30 percent) who, in 
turn, splits it with the builder. 
• The borrower is steered to a participating broker and title company and is qualified 
based on material misrepresentations. 
• The builder offers to manage the property for the borrower with the promise of four 
years with no mortgage payments. 
• The property may remain vacant and the neighborhood may be deteriorating. 
• The loan remains current for a period of time but then goes into delinquency. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.927 



:


a scheme involv a straw borrow
other builder seek straw borrow who ar often induc with norisk invest
properti ownership sometim the straw borrow is affili with the builder in anoth
variat of thi scheme the builder fail to complet construct but obtain a straw
borrow and an inflat apprais to origin a loan
a builder bailout scheme involv a straw borrow mai plai out as follow
the builder recruit a straw borrow to purchas the properti for no monei down and
cash back at close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais that is us as a basi for the loan amount thi
inflat loan amount will allow the builder to recoup hi expens pai a fee to the straw
and keep the loan current for two to four year thi might appear on the hud1
statement as a disproportion commiss to a real estat agent 30 percent who in
turn split it with the builder
the borrow is steer to a particip broker and titl compani and is qualifi
base on materi misrepresent
the builder offer to manag the properti for the borrow with the promis of four
year with no mortgag payment
the properti mai remain vacant and the neighborhood mai be deterior
the loan remain current for a period of time but then goe into delinqu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1927
