2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Deceptive Short Sales


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Deceptive Short Sales 
Short sales —which are a viable means to avoid forecl osure—occur when the lender agrees to 
accept a lesser amount than the balance on the loan. Most lenders will entertain the idea of a 
short sale because, for the lender, the foreclosure process is time-consuming and expensive. 
They would rather avoid the costs associated with a foreclosure so that the bank does not 
have to take the property in as a non-performing asset and try to sell it. Borrowers are 
receptive to short sales because they keep foreclosures off their credit reports. However, 
because short sales usually involve properties that that are sold for extremely low prices, they 
also provide fraudsters with opportunities to obtain cheap property to use in the 
advancement of other schemes.  
 
With the recent rise in foreclosures, the inventory for potential short sales will increase, as 
will the opportunities for scammers to obtain cheap property to use in the advancement of 
other schemes. The short sale scenario used by fraudsters allows them to obtain these 
properties inexpensively under false pretense. This is generally accomplished by acquiring an 
under-valued appraisal. 
 
The following are red flags suggesting the existence of a short-sale scheme: 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.928                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The fraud occurs well after the loan origination, in the lender’s workout/servicing 
department. 
• The property is facing foreclosure. 
• The house is staged to obtain an undervalued appraisal. 
• The seller will only sign the sales contract at the day of closing.  
• No official letter or document exists to provide proof that the short sale has  
been approved.  
• There are multiple sales contracts. 
• The property is immediately or concurrently resold at a price that is higher than the 
discounted value. 
• Multiple HUD settlement statements exist that do not mirror the economic basis of  
the transaction. 
• Payments made to the sellers are not disclosed on the HUD settlement statement.  
• After the property is in default or foreclosure, there are changes in ownership, but there 
is neither a new mortgage nor the dismissal of the foreclosure suit. 
• Communications with the short-sale lender are restricted. 
 



:


decept short sale
short sale which ar a viabl mean to avoid forecl osureoccur when the lender agre to
accept a lesser amount than the balanc on the loan most lender will entertain the idea of a
short sale becaus for the lender the foreclosur process is timeconsum and expens
thei would rather avoid the cost associ with a foreclosur so that the bank doe not
have to take the properti in as a nonperform asset and try to sell it borrow ar
recept to short sale becaus thei keep foreclosur off their credit report howev
becaus short sale usual involv properti that that ar sold for extrem low price thei
also provid fraudster with opportun to obtain cheap properti to us in the
advanc of other scheme
with the recent rise in foreclosur the inventori for potenti short sale will increas as
will the opportun for scammer to obtain cheap properti to us in the advanc of
other scheme the short sale scenario us by fraudster allow them to obtain these
properti inexpens under fals pretens thi is gener accomplish by acquir an
undervalu apprais
the follow ar red flag suggest the exist of a shortsal scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1928 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud occur well after the loan origin in the lender workoutserv
depart
the properti is face foreclosur
the hous is stage to obtain an undervalu apprais
the seller will onli sign the sale contract at the dai of close
no offici letter or document exist to provid proof that the short sale ha
been approv
there ar multipl sale contract
the properti is immedi or concurr resold at a price that is higher than the
discount valu
multipl hud settlement statement exist that do not mirror the econom basi of
the transact
payment made to the seller ar not disclos on the hud settlement statement
after the properti is in default or foreclosur there ar chang in ownership but there
is neither a new mortgag nor the dismiss of the foreclosur suit
commun with the shortsal lender ar restrict
