2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Foreclosure Rescue Scams/BAILOUT OR RESCUE SCAMS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


BAILOUT OR RESCUE SCAMS 
In a bailout scam  (also called a rescue scam), the homeowner is tricked into conveying the deed 
to his house to the fraudster and ultimately loses both the house and any equity. A bailout 
scam unfolds when a homeowner is solicited with an offer of private, non-qualifying, short-
 term financing that will pay off a delinquent debt and allow the homeowner to stay in his 
home while his credit is repaired. As part of the agreement, which is usually verbal, the 
homeowner is convinced by the “investor” that, to qualify for the short-term financing, the 
homeowner will need to convey title to the property as collateral. Once the fraudster obtains 
the title, he sells the property at fair market value, pays off the debt, and skims the equity 
that was owed to the homeowner.  
 
Some other characteristics of bailout scams include the following: 
• The rescuer relies on a lender’s funds to accomplish the scam.  
• The rescuer recruits other borrowers to purchase the “rescued” properties once he has 
obtained their titles. The borrower may think that he is buying a legitimate investment 
property, or the borrower could be a straw who is paid to purchase turnkey investment 
properties. 
• The borrower is steered to a mortgage broker (or perhaps the rescuer himself is a 
mortgage broker) and qualifies for a mortgage to purchase the property at the fair market 
value (not the amount that is due on the outstanding loan). Unbeknownst to him, the 
borrower is qualified based on misrepresentation. In other cases, the straw is 
compensated for his participation in the scheme. 
• Collusion with a title company is critical. The homeowner is instructed by the rescuer to 
go to a particular title company, or the rescuer convinces the homeowner to execute a 
power of attorney (POA) giving the rescuer authorization to close the transaction, or 
papers are closed at the homeowner’s house  in a kitchen closing. Either way, the 
homeowner is in essence deeding his property to the rescuer’s borrower. Generally, in 
these cases the homeowner does not understand what is being signed, the proceeds pay 
off the defaulted loan, and the equity goes to the rescuer.  
• The straw walks away from the transaction, while the legitimate new owner (borrower) 
discovers that the tenant can’t keep up with  the rent payments and has depleted his cash 
reserves to keep the loan current. The title company fails to pay off the old debt and the 
original lender starts foreclosure procedures immediately. 
 
Many states are aggressively passing legislation to protect homeowners in foreclosure from 
these scams.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.931 
Homeowners fall for foreclosure rescue schemes because: 
• The market is saturated with rescue services that are fraught with lies, deception, 
exaggeration, and pressure. 
• The homeowner is often trusting and doesn’t believe that someone would lie to him. 
• The homeowner is kept in the dark about the foreclosure process, perhaps because he is 
told to cease all contact with the lender’s foreclosure department. 
• The homeowner may be desperate to save his home and believes there is little time to 
act. 
• The homeowner may lack financial sophistication. 
 



:


bailout or rescu scam
in a bailout scam also call a rescu scam the homeown is trick into convei the deed
to hi hous to the fraudster and ultim lose both the hous and ani equiti a bailout
scam unfold when a homeown is solicit with an offer of privat nonqualifi short
term financ that will pai off a delinqu debt and allow the homeown to stai in hi
home while hi credit is repair as part of the agreement which is usual verbal the
homeown is convinc by the investor that to qualifi for the shortterm financ the
homeown will need to convei titl to the properti as collater onc the fraudster obtain
the titl he sell the properti at fair market valu pai off the debt and skim the equiti
that wa ow to the homeown
some other characterist of bailout scam includ the follow
the rescuer reli on a lender fund to accomplish the scam
the rescuer recruit other borrow to purchas the rescu properti onc he ha
obtain their titl the borrow mai think that he is bui a legitim invest
properti or the borrow could be a straw who is paid to purchas turnkei invest
properti
the borrow is steer to a mortgag broker or perhap the rescuer himself is a
mortgag broker and qualifi for a mortgag to purchas the properti at the fair market
valu not the amount that is due on the outstand loan unbeknownst to him the
borrow is qualifi base on misrepresent in other case the straw is
compens for hi particip in the scheme
collus with a titl compani is critic the homeown is instruct by the rescuer to
go to a particular titl compani or the rescuer convinc the homeown to execut a
power of attornei poa give the rescuer author to close the transact or
paper ar close at the homeown hous in a kitchen close either wai the
homeown is in essenc deed hi properti to the rescuer borrow gener in
these case the homeown doe not understand what is be sign the proce pai
off the default loan and the equiti goe to the rescuer
the straw walk awai from the transact while the legitim new owner borrow
discov that the tenant cant keep up with the rent payment and ha deplet hi cash
reserv to keep the loan current the titl compani fail to pai off the old debt and the
origin lender start foreclosur procedur immedi
mani state ar aggress pass legisl to protect homeown in foreclosur from
these scam
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1931
homeown fall for foreclosur rescu scheme becaus
the market is satur with rescu servic that ar fraught with li decept
exagger and pressur
the homeown is often trust and doesnt believ that someon would lie to him
the homeown is kept in the dark about the foreclosur process perhap becaus he is
told to ceas all contact with the lender foreclosur depart
the homeown mai be desper to save hi home and believ there is littl time to
act
the homeown mai lack financi sophist
