2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/New Account Fraud Schemes/Business Accounts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Business Accounts 
Business principals should provide evidence of legal status (e.g., sole proprietorship, 
partnership, or incorporation or association) when opening a business account. 
 
Check the name of a commercial enterprise with a reporting agency and check prior bank 
references. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s business thanking the customer for opening the 
account. Disconnected phone service warrants further investigation. 
 
When circumstances allow, perform a visual check of the business to verify the actual 
existence of the business and that the business has the capability of providing the services 
described. 
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should be 
questioned. 
 
Since tellers are oftentimes the front-line defense in preventing check fraud, it is important 
that they receive training that will allow them to identify fraudulent checks.  
 
Tellers should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Look for checks with numbers lower than 200. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges on the checks. 
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered identification. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits:  
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.934                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


busi account
busi princip should provid evid of legal statu eg sole proprietorship
partnership or incorpor or associ when open a busi account
check the name of a commerci enterpris with a report agenc and check prior bank
refer
follow up with call to the custom busi thank the custom for open the
account disconnect phone servic warrant further investig
when circumst allow perform a visual check of the busi to verifi the actual
exist of the busi and that the busi ha the capabl of provid the servic
describ
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should be
question
sinc teller ar oftentim the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import
that thei receiv train that will allow them to identifi fraudul check
teller should
be awar of magnet rout number
look for check with number lower than 200
be awar of the date that the account wa open
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg on the check
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt identif
recogn forg negoti instrument
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
financi institut fraud financi transact
1934 2011 fraud examin manual
