2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD 
 
Financial statement schemes are one of a large category of frauds that fall under the heading 
of Occupational Fraud and Abuse, which is defined as “the use of one’s occupation for personal 
enrichment through the deliberate misuse or misapplication of the employing organization’s 
resources or assets.” Simply stated, occupational frauds are those in which an employee, 
manager, officer, or owner of an organization commits fraud to the detriment of that 
organization. The three major types of occupational fraud are: Corruption, Asset 
Misappropriation, and Fraudulent Statements (which include financial statement schemes). 
The complete classification of occupational fraud is shown below:   
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.302                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.303 
What Is Financial Statement Fraud? 
Financial statement fraud is the deliberate misrepresentation  of the financial condition of an 
enterprise accomplished through the intentional misstatement or omission  of amounts or 
disclosures in the financial statements to deceive  financial statement users.  
 
Financial statement fraud is usually a means to an end rather than an end in itself. When 
people “cook the books” they may be doing it to “buy more time” to quietly fix business 
problems that prevent their company from achieving its expected earnings or complying 
with loan covenants. It may also be done to obtain or renew financing that would not be 
granted, or would be smaller, if honest financial statements were provided. People who are 
intent on profiting from crime may commit financial statement fraud to obtain loans they 
can then siphon off for personal gain or to inflate the price of the company’s shares, 
allowing them to sell their holdings or exercise stock options at a profit. However, in many 
past cases of financial statement fraud, the perpetrators have gained little or nothing 
personally in financial terms. Instead the focus appears to have been preserving their status 
as leaders of the organization—a status that might have been lost had the real financial 
results been published promptly.  
 
Financial statement fraud usually involves overstating assets, revenues, and profits and 
understating liabilities, expenses, and losses. However, the overall objective of the 
manipulation may sometimes require the opposite action, e.g., concealing over-budget results 
in a good year in order to help the subsequent year, which is expected to be tougher. 
 
 
The Cost of Financial Statement Fraud 
Financial statement fraud frequently has a devastating impact on the reputation and the 
financial position of organizations and people involved. The stock market capitalization of 
companies affected by financial statement fraud may fall substantially almost overnight, 
losing billions of dollars for investors. A 2006 report by the United States Government 
Accountability Office (GAO-06-678) found that in the three trading days surrounding the 
initial announcement of a restatement, the companies studied lost an adjusted amount of $36 
billion in market capitalization. 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.304                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Many jobs may be lost as companies restructu re to try to restore profitability. As media 
interviews of former Enron employees showed, financial statement fraud can exert a high 
toll on the well-being of employees, who may lose their jobs, their pensions, their savings 
invested in their employer’s stock, and health care and other benefits. The company’s 
auditors are likely to be sued for the amount of investors’ losses, which these days may mean 
tens of billions of dollars for large public companies. For large and small companies alike, 
financial statement fraud can be hugely costly and, potentially, a corporate deathblow. 
 
 
Why Financial Statement Fraud Is Committed 
There are a number of reasons why individuals commit financial statement fraud. Most 
commonly, financial statement fraud is used to make a company’s earnings look better on 
paper. It sometimes covers up the embezzlement of company funds. Financial fraud occurs 
through a variety of methods, such as valuation judgments and fine points of timing the 
recording of transactions. These more subtle types of fraud are often dismissed as either 
mistakes or errors in judgment and estimation. Some of the more common reasons why 
people commit financial statement fraud include: 
• To encourage investment through the sale of stock. 
• To demonstrate increased earnings per share or partnership profits interest, thus 
allowing increased dividend/distribution payouts. 
• To cover inability to generate cash flow.  
• To dispel negative market perceptions. 
• To obtain financing, or to obtain more favorable terms on existing financing. 
• To receive higher purchase prices for acquisitions. 
• To demonstrate compliance with financing covenants. 
• To meet company goals and objectives. 
• To receive performance-related bonuses. 
 
This limited list of reasons shows that the motivation for financial fraud does not always 
involve direct personal financial gain. Sometimes, the cause of fraudulent financial reporting 
is the combination of situational pressures on either the company or the manager and the 
opportunity to commit the fraud without the perception of being detected. These pressures 
are known as “red flags.” That is to say, if red flags (situational pressures and opportunity) 
are present, then the risk of financial reporting fraud increases significantly. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.305 
Examples of situational pressures include: 
• Sudden decreases in revenue or market share experienced by a company or an industry. 
• Unrealistic budget pressures, particularly for short-term results (the pressures become 
even greater with arbitrarily established budgets that are without reference to current 
conditions).  
• Financial pressures resulting from bonus plans that depend on short-term economic 
performance (these pressures are particularly acute if the bonus is a significant 
component of the individual’s total compensation). 
 
Opportunities to commit fraud most often arise gradually. Generally, these opportunities can 
stem from a lack of adequate oversight functions within the company. The existence of an 
oversight function does not, in and of itself, guarantee the detection of fraudulent acts; the 
oversight function must also respond effectively. The perception of detection, not internal 
control per se, is arguably the strongest deterrent to fraud.  
 
Some of the more obvious opportunities for the existence of fraud are: 
• Absence of a board of directors or audit committee. 
• Improper oversight or other neglectful behavior by the board of directors or audit 
committee. 
• Weak or nonexistent internal controls, including an ineffective internal audit staff and a 
lack of external audits. 
• Unusual or complex transactions (an understanding of the transactions, their component 
parts, and their impact on financial statements is paramount to fraud deterrence).  
• Financial estimates that require significant subjective judgment by management. 
 
 
Trends in Financial Statement Fraud 
Financial statement fraud is estimated to comprise about 10 percent of all occupational 
frauds. According to the ACFE’s 2010 Report to the Nations on  Occupational Fraud a nd Abuse, 
fraudulent statements comprised 4.8 percent of the frauds reported in the study, with a 
median loss of $4,100,000. However, it is im portant to note that quoted losses resulting 
from financial statement fraud are often measuring lost market capitalization or lost 
shareholder value rather than direct loss of financial assets. This does not make the scheme 
any less harmful; in fact, the lost shareholder value resulting from financial statement fraud 
can have crippling effects on even the largest companies, as we have seen with high-profile 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.306                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
frauds such as the Enron and WorldCom scandals. It can also have a tremendous impact on 
the organization’s shareholders. 
 
Similar results came out of a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) study required 
under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX). The agen cy was charged with reviewing incidents of 
financial statement fraud in the five years prior to passage of the legislation. From July 31, 
1997 through July 30, 2002, the SEC filed 51 5 enforcement actions for financial reporting 
and disclosure violations arising out of 227 Division of Enforcement investigations 
(enforcement matters). The 515 actions included 869 named parties, consisting of 164 
entities and 705 individuals. The year-over-year numbers reveal the growing problem of 
financial reporting violations during the study period.  
 
 
(Source: SEC, Report Pursuant to Section 704 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 
http://www.sec.gov/news/s tudies/sox704report.pdf) 
 
Most of the actions involved improper revenue recognition. In 126 of the 227 enforcement 
matters, management reported fictitious sales, improperly timed revenue recognition, or 
improperly valued revenue. Another 101 enforcement matters involved improper expense 
recognition, including improper capitalization or deferral of expenses; improper use of 
reserves; or other understatements of expenses. Additionally, 23 enforcement matters 
involved improper accounting for business combinations. And 137 enforcement matters 
involved other accounting and reporting issues, such as inadequate Management’s 
Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) disclosure and improper use of off-balance sheet 
arrangements. (See the following chart. Note:  The sum of the numbers in the second 
column is greater than the total number of 227 because most of the actions involved more 
than one type of improper conduct.)  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.307 
 
Improper Accounting Practice Number of Enforcement Matters 
Involving Each Practice 
Improper Revenue Recognition 126 
Improper Expense Recognition 101 
Improper Accounting in Connection with Business 
Combinations 
23 
Other Accounting and Reporting Issues: 130 
Inadequate Disclosures in MD&A and Elsewhere 43 
Failure to Disclose Related-Party Transactions 23 
Inappropriate Accounting for Non-Monetary and 
Roundtrip Transactions 
19 
Improper Accounting for Foreign Payments in Violation 
of the FCPA 
6 
Improper Use of Of f-Balance Sheet Arrangements 3 
Improper Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures 2 
(Source: SEC, Report Pursuant to Section 704 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 
http://www.sec.gov/news/s tudies/sox704report.pdf) 
 
The SEC study revealed further proof of management’s involvement in financial statement 
fraud. In these enforcement matters, charges were brought against 75 chairmen of the board, 
111 chief executive officers (CEOs), 111 presidents, 105 chief financial officers (CFOs), 21 
chief operating officers (COOs), 16 chief accounting officers (CAOs), and 27 vice presidents 
(VPs) of finance.  
 
Studies by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)—formerly known as the 
General Accounting Office—also revealed compar able trends in financial statement fraud. 
In July 2006, the GAO issued an update to its 2002 report, Financial Statement Restatements: 
Trends, Market Impacts, Regulatory Responses, and Remaining Challenges. The original report was 
based on the GAO’s analysis of 689 of 919 financial statement restatements occurring from 
January 1, 1997 through June 30, 2002. To update the information in the original, the GAO 
undertook a similar analysis of 1,390 public company restatements that occurred between 
January 1, 2002 and September 30, 2005. The following are some of the findings of the two 
studies:  
• The percentage of publicly traded companies announcing restatements increased from 
less than one percent in 1997 to over three percent by the end of 2002. This percentage 
rose again, to 6.8 percent, by September of 2005.  
• The quantity of restatements resulting from accounting irregularities grew from 92 in 
1997 to 314 in 2002, or approximately 241 percent. In the first 9 months of 2005 
(through September 30), there were 523 restatements announced, which amounted to an 
increase of approximately 67 percent from 2002 and more than 468 percent from 1997.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.308                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The average size of a company restating its financial statements increased from $500 
million in 1997 to $2 billion in 2002. By September 30, 2005, the average market 
capitalization of a company announcing a restatement had grown to $6 billion. 
• Cost and expense issues were the most common reason for restatements between July 
2002 and September 2005. These restatements, which include over- or understating costs 
or expenses, improper classification of costs, and other misreporting of costs, accounted 
for over 35 percent of restatements examined during that period. In the 2002 study, cost 
and expense issues were the second most common reason for restatement, comprising 
16 percent of all restatements.  
• Twenty percent of the restatements analyzed in the 2006 study were due to revenue 
recognition issues, making this the second most common reason for restatement during 
the period studied. This represents a decline from the 2002 study in which revenue 
recognition was the most common reason for restatement, comprising 38 percent of the 
population. Revenue recognition restatements include recognizing revenue sooner or 
later than allowed under GAAP or recognizing questionable or fictitious revenue. 
 
Today, financial statement and accounting fraud cases continue to be the single largest 
category of SEC actions filed. Many relate to the subprime mortgage market, and another 
large group relate to executive compensation. Most notably, the SEC filed civil suits 
expanding the scope of substantive claims and remedies, aggressively applying the 
"clawback" provision of Section 304 of the Sa rbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and alleging false 
disclosures of non-GAAP financial metrics in violation of Regulation G. 
 
In the summer of 2010, COSO issued the Fraudulent Financial Reporting 1998-2 0 0 7 : An 
Analysis of U.S. Public Companies.  Highlights of the report are as follows: 
• 347 companies were involved in alleged incidents of financial statement fraud during the 
10 year period. 
• Seventy-two percent of the cases named the CEO, and 65 percent named the CFO as 
being associated with the fraud. 
• The average fraud lasted 31.4 months, with the median fraud lasting 24 months. 
• Virtually all of the firms received an un qualified audit opinion on the last set of 
fraudulently misstated financial statements. 
• Twenty percent of the frauds of public companies occurred in the computer 
hardware/software industry.  Manufacturing also represented 20 percent of the frauds. 
• Improper revenue recognition occurred 61 percent of the fraud methods. Overstatement 
of assets occurred in 51 percent of the cases. Understatement of liabilities/expenses 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.309 
occurred in 31 percent of the cases.  Insider trading was cited in 24 percent of the cases 
as well. 
 
 
Financial Statement Fraud Schemes 
Fraud in financial statements typically takes the form of: 
• Overstated assets or revenue 
• Understated liabilities and expenses 
 
Overstating assets and revenues falsely reflects a financially stronger company by inclusion 
of fictitious asset costs or artificial revenues. Understated liabilities and expenses are shown 
through exclusion of costs or financial obligations. Both methods result in increased equity 
and net worth for the company. This manipulation results in increased earnings per share or 
partnership profit interests, or a more stable picture of the company’s true situation.  
 
However, in government contracts, just the opposite may be true: 
• Assets and revenues are understated. 
• Liabilities and expenses are overstated. 
 
Why? As explained by government auditors, entities may rely on understated revenues or 
overstated expenses to get more money for a project or contract. However, such schemes 
are by far the minority of financial statement fraud cases. 
 
To demonstrate the over- and understatements typically used to fraudulently enhance the 
financial statements, the schemes have been divided into five classes. Because the maintenance 
of financial records involves a double-entry system, fraudulent accounting entries always affect 
at least two accounts and, therefore, at least two categories on the financial statements. While 
the areas described below reflect their financial statement classifications, keep in mind that the 
other side of the fraudulent transaction exists elsewhere. It is common for schemes to involve 
a combination of several methods. The five classifications of financial statement schemes are: 
• Fictitious revenues 
• Timing differences  
• Improper asset valuations 
• Concealed liabilities and expenses 
• Improper disclosures 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.310                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fictitious Revenues  
Fictitious or fabricated revenues involve the recording of sales of goods or services that did 
not occur. Fictitious sales most often involve fake or phantom customers, but can also 
involve legitimate customers. For example, a fictitious invoice can be prepared (but not 
mailed) for a legitimate customer although the goods are not delivered or the services are not 
rendered. At the beginning of the next accounting period, the sale might be reversed to help 
conceal the fraud, but this may lead to a revenue shortfall in the new period, creating the 
need for more fictitious sales. Another method is to use legitimate customers and artificially 
inflate or alter invoices reflecting higher amounts or quantities than are actually sold.  
 
Generally speaking, revenue is recognized when it is (1) realized or realizable, and (2) earned. 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) 
Topic 13, Revenue Recognition (now codified in FASB ASC 605-10-S99), to provide additional 
guidance on revenue recognition criteria and to rein in some of the inappropriate practices 
that had been observed. FASB ASC 605-10-S99 states that revenue is typically considered 
realized or realizable, and earned when all of the following criteria are met: 
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; 
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; 
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable; and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured. 
 
EXAMPLE OF FICTITIOUS REVENUES 
In one case, a foreign subsidiary of a U.S. company recorded several large fictitious sales to 
a series of companies. They invoiced the sa les but did not collect any of the accounts 
receivable, which became severely past due. The manager of the foreign subsidiary arranged 
for false confirmations of  the accounts receivable for audit purposes and even hired actors to 
pretend to be the customers during a visit fr om U.S. management. Background checks on 
the customers would have revealed that some of the companies were fictitious while others 
either were undisclosed related parties or operated in industries that would have no need for 
the goods supposedly supplied. An investigation  revealed that the manager of the foreign 
subsidiary directed the scheme to record fictitious revenues in order to meet unrealistic 
revenue goals set by U.S. management.  
 
In some cases, companies go to great lengths to conceal fictitious sales. A sample journal 
entry from such a case is detailed below. A fictional entry is made to record a purported 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.311 
purchase of fixed assets. This entry debits fixed assets for the amount of the alleged 
purchase and the credit is to cash for the payment: 
 
Date Description Ref. Debit Credit 
12/01/X1 Fixed Assets 104 350,000  
 Cash 101  350,000 
 
A fictitious sales entry is then made for the same amount as the false purchase, debiting 
accounts receivable and crediting the sales account. The cash outflow that supposedly paid 
for the fixed assets is “returned” as payment on the receivable account, though in practice 
the cash might never have moved if the fraudsters didn’t bother to falsify that extra 
documentary support. 
 
Date Description Ref. Debit Credit 
12/01/X1 Accounts Rec 120 350,000  
 Sales 400  350,000 
12/15/X1 Cash 101 350,000  
 Accounts Rec 120  350,000 
 
The result of this completely fabricated sequence of events is an increase in both fixed assets 
and revenue. The debit could alternatively have been directed to other accounts, such as 
inventory or accounts payable, or simply left in accounts receivable if the fraud were 
committed close to the year’s end and the receivable could be left outstanding without 
attracting undue attention. 
 
Sales with Conditions  
Sales with conditions are those that have terms that have not been completed and the rights 
and risks of ownership have not passed to the purchaser. They do not qualify for recording 
as revenue. These types of sales are similar to schemes involving the recognition of revenue 
in improper periods, since the conditions for sale may become satisfied in the future, at 
which point revenue recognition would become appropriate. The recognition of revenue in 
improper periods is discussed further in the next section.  
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Fictitious Revenues? 
The following red flags are associated with fictitious revenues:  
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.312                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth.  
• Significant transactions with related parties or special purpose entities not in the ordinary 
course of business or where those entities are not audited or are audited by a separate 
firm.  
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to the period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Unusual growth in the days’ sales in receivables ratio (receivables/average daily sales). 
• A significant volume of sales to entities whose substance and ownership is not known. 
• An unusual surge in sales by a minority of units within a company, or in sales recorded 
by corporate headquarters. 
 
Timing Differences (Including Premature Revenue Recognition)  
Financial statement fraud might also involve timing differences, that is, the recording of 
revenues or expenses in improper periods. This can be done to shift revenues or expenses 
between one period and the next, increasing or decreasing earnings as desired. 
 
Premature Revenue Recognition 
As previously mentioned, revenue should be recognized in the accounting records when the 
following four criteria as set out in FASB ASC 605-10-S99 have been satisfied: 
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; 
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; 
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable; and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured. 
 
One or more of these criteria is typically  not met when managers recognize revenues 
prematurely. Examples of common problems with premature revenue recognition are set 
out below. 
 
PERSUASIVE EVIDENCE OF AN ARRANGEMENT DOES NOT EXIST 
• No written or verbal agreement exists. 
• A verbal agreement exists but a written agreement is customary. 
• A written order exists but is conditional upon sale to end users (such as a consignment 
sale). 
• A written order exists but contains a right of return. 
• A written order exists but a side letter alters the terms in ways that eliminate the required 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.313 
elements for an agreement. 
• The transaction is with a related party, which has not been disclosed. 
 
DELIVERY HAS NOT OCCURRED OR SERVICES HAVE NOT BEEN RENDERED 
• Shipment has not been made and the criteria for recognizing revenue on “bill-and-hold” 
transactions set out in FASB ASC 605-10-S99 have not been met. 
• Shipment has been made not to the customer but to the seller’s agent, an installer, or to a 
public warehouse. 
• Some, but not all, of the components required for operation were shipped. 
• Items of the wrong specification were shipped. 
• Delivery is not complete until installation, customer testing, and customer acceptance 
has occurred. 
• Services have not been provided at all. 
• Services are being performed over an extended period and only a portion of the service 
revenues should have been recognized in the current period. 
• The mix of goods and services in a contract has been misstated in order to improperly 
accelerate revenue recognition. 
 
THE SELLER’S PRICE TO THE BUYER IS NOT FIXED OR DETERMINABLE 
• The price is contingent upon some future events. 
• A service or membership fee is subject to unpredictable cancellation during the contract 
period. 
• The transaction includes an option to exchange the product for others. 
• Payment terms are extended for a substantial period and additional discounts or 
upgrades may be required to induce continued use and payment instead of switching to 
alternative products. 
 
COLLECTIBILITY IS NOT REASONABLY ASSURED 
• Collection is contingent upon a future event, such as resale of the product, receipt of 
additional funding, or litigation. 
• The customer does not have the ability to pay; for example, it is financially troubled, it 
has purchased far more than it can afford, or it is a shell company with minimal assets. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC, Inc. sells products that require engineering and adapting work before they are 
acceptable to customers. However, the company records sales revenue before completing the 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.314                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
engineering, testing, evaluation, and customer acceptance stages of production. In some cases, 
sales do not take place for weeks or months.  In other cases, the sales are specifically 
contingent upon the customer’s trial and acceptance of the product.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Another company is engaged in the design, development, manufacture, marketing, and 
servicing of computer peripheral subsystems. The company recognized revenue prior to a time 
when collection of the sales price was reasonably assured and at  a time prior to completion 
of the underlying sales transaction. 
 
It was the company’s policy to recognize revenue  when the products we re shipped. However, 
the sales were not complete as of the time of shipment because customers were not obligated 
to pay for the equipment until it had been installed; the company had substantial 
obligations to the customers for installation  and adjustments; and there remained major 
uncertainties concerning the customers’ true willingness to complete the transaction because 
of the volatile nature of the high-tech product. 
 
Long-Term Contracts 
Long-term contracts pose special problems for revenue recognition. Long-term construction 
contracts, for example, use either the completed-contract method or the percentage-of-completion 
method, depending partly on the circumstances. The completed-contract 
method does not record revenue until the project is 100 percent complete. Construction 
costs are held in an inventory account until completion of the project. The percentage-of-completion 
method recognizes revenues and expenses as measurable progress on a project is 
made, but this method is particularly vulnerable to manipulation. Managers can often easily 
manipulate the percentage-of-completion and the estimated costs to complete a construction 
project in order to recognize revenues prematurely and conceal contract overruns.  
 
Multiple Deliverables 
Product and service sales sometimes involve multiple deliverables (or multiple-element 
arrangements). For example, a cell phone company provides a discounted or free cell phone 
to a customer who signs up for a two-year service agreement; in this situation, the 
deliverables include both the product (cell phone) and the service, which spans two years. In 
multiple-element arrangements, the seller completes the earnings process—and thus must 
recognize revenue—over a period of time.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.315 
Under FASB ASC 605-25, Revenue Recognition—Multiple-Element Arrangements, companies are 
required to estimate the price of the individual components in a multiple-element sale. 
Companies must then recognize the revenue related to each of the components as they are 
delivered. The inherent inexact nature of the estimates involved in this process leaves this 
revenue recognition method vulnerable to fraud as managers can manipulate the estimated 
price of the individual components in order to delay or accelerate revenue recognition. 
 
Channel-Stuffing 
A challenging area of revenue recognition that has attracted the attention of the SEC is 
known as “channel-stuffing.” Channel-stuffing refers to the sale of an unusually large 
quantity of a product to distributors who are encouraged to overbuy through the use of deep 
discounts or extended payment terms. This practice is especially attractive to industries with 
high gross margins, such as tobacco, pharmaceuticals, perfume, soda concentrate, and 
branded consumer goods, because it can increase short-term earnings. On the downside, 
however, stealing from future periods’ sales makes it harder to achieve sales goals in those 
future periods. The pressure to meet sales goals can, in turn, lead to increasingly disruptive 
levels of channel-stuffing and, ultimately, to a restatement. Although orders are received, the 
terms of the order might raise questions about the collectibility of the accounts receivable, 
and any existing side agreements that grant a right of return may, effectively, turn the sales 
into consignment sales. Also, there might be a greater risk of returns for certain products if 
they cannot be sold before their shelf life ends.  
 
In recent years, the SEC has brought enforcement actions or charges related to channel-stuffing 
against a number of major U.S. corporations, including McAfee, Inc. and The Coca-Cola 
Company. In 2006, the SEC released a press release stating that McAfee agreed to settle 
the proceedings and pay a $50 million penalty after being charged by the SEC with 
accounting fraud (http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2006-3.htm). According to the press 
release, the accounting fraud charges included allegations that “McAfee used a variety of 
undisclosed ploys during [the years 1998 throug h 2000] to aggressively oversell its products 
to distributors in amounts that far exceeded the public’s demand for the products.” The 
SEC alleged that, as part of this channel-stuffing scheme, McAfee: 
• Improperly recorded the sales to distributors as revenue; 
• Offered its distributors lucrative sales incentives, including deep price discounts and 
rebates, in an effort to persuade the distributors to continue to buy and stockpile 
McAfee products; 
• Secretly paid distributors millions of dollars to hold the excess inventory rather than 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.316                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
return it to McAfee for a refund and consequent reduction in McAfee’s revenues; 
• Used an undisclosed, wholly-owned subsidiary, Net Tools, Inc. to repurchase inventory 
that McAfee had oversold to its distributors; and, 
• Took action to conceal the fraud from investors by, among other things, wrongly 
recording in its books the payments and discounts that it offered to distributors, and 
improperly manipulating reserve accounts to increase inadequate sales reserves and cover 
the costs of the distributor payments. 
 
In 2005, the SEC issued a press release announcing an enforcement action against The 
Coca-Cola Company relating to its channel-stuffing practice in Japan known as “gallon 
pushing” ( http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2005-58.htm). According to the press release, 
the SEC found that, from 1997 through 1999, Coca-Cola failed to disclose certain end-of-
 quarter sales practices used to meet earnings expectations. Specifically, Coca-Cola was 
alleged by the SEC to have offered extended credit to Japanese bottlers to induce them to 
purchase quantities of beverage concentrate the bottlers otherwise would not have 
purchased until a following period. Although Coca-Cola’s accounting treatment for sales 
made in connection with gallon pushing was found to be without issue, the SEC did find 
that Coca-Cola’s failure to disclose the impact of gallon pushing on current and future 
earnings, as well as related false statements and omissions within a pertinent Form 8-K, 
violated the antifraud and periodic reporting requirements of the federal securities laws.  
 
Recording Expenses in the Wrong Period 
The timely recording of expenses is often compromised due to pressures to meet budget 
projections and goals, or due to lack of proper accounting controls. As the expensing of 
certain costs is pushed into periods other than the ones in which they actually occur, they are 
not properly matched against the income that they help produce. For example, revenue may 
be recognized on the sale of certain items, but the cost of goods and services that went into 
the items sold might intentionally not be recorded in the accounting system until the 
subsequent period. This might make the sales revenue from the transaction almost pure 
profit, inflating earnings. In the next period, earnings would be depressed by a similar 
amount. 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Timing Differences (Including Premature Revenue Recognition)? 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry.  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.317 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth.  
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to the period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Unusual increase in gross margin or gross margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Unusual growth in the days’ sales in receivables ratio (receivables/average daily sales). 
• Unusual decline in the days’ purchases in accounts payable ratio (accounts 
payable/average daily purchases). 
 
Improper Asset Valuation 
Under the “lower of cost or market value” ru le, where an asset’s  cost exceeds its current 
market value (as happens often with obsolete technology), the asset must be written down to 
market value. With the exception of certain securities, asset values are generally not increased 
to reflect current market value. It is often necessary to use estimates in accounting. For 
example, estimates are used in determining the residual value and the useful life of a 
depreciable asset, the uncollectible portion of accounts receivable, or the excess or obsolete 
portion of inventory. Whenever estimates are used, there is an additional opportunity for 
fraud by manipulating those estimates.  
 
Many schemes are used to inflate current assets  at the expense of long-term assets. The net 
effect is seen in the current ratio. The misclassification of long-term assets as current assets 
can be of critical concern to lending institutions that often require the maintenance of 
certain financial ratios. This is of particular consequence when the loan covenants are on 
unsecured or under-secured lines of credit and other short-term borrowings. Sometimes 
these misclassifications are referred to as “window dressing.” 
 
Most improper asset valuations involve the fraudulent overstatement of inventory or 
receivables. Other improper asset valuations include manipulation of the allocation of the 
purchase price of an acquired business in order to inflate future earnings, misclassification of 
fixed and other assets, or improper capitalization of inventory or start-up costs.  
 
Improper asset valuations usually take the form of one of the following classifications:  
• Inventory valuation 
• Accounts receivable 
• Business combinations 
• Fixed assets 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.318                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inventory Valuation 
Inventory should be recorded at the lower of cost or market value. This means that 
inventory must be valued at its acquisition cost, except when the cost is determined to be 
higher than the current market value, in which case it should be written down to its current 
value, or written off altogether if it has no value. Failing to write down inventory results in 
overstated assets and the mismatching of cost of goods sold with revenues. Other methods 
by which inventory can be improperly stated include manipulation of the physical inventory 
count, inflation of the unit costs used to price out inventory, and failure to relieve inventory 
for the costs of goods sold. Fictitious inventory schemes usually involve the creation of fake 
documents, such as inventory count sheets and receiving reports. Companies have even 
programmed special computer reports of inventory for auditors that incorrectly added up 
the line item values so as to inflate the overall inventory balance. Computer-assisted audit 
techniques can significantly help auditors to detect many of these inventory fraud 
techniques. 
 
In some instances, friendly coconspirators claim to be holding inventory for companies in 
question. Other times, companies falsely report large values of inventory in transit (perhaps 
in the middle of the Pacific Ocean), knowing that the auditors will have a difficult time 
observing it. “Bill and hold” items that have already been recorded as sales might be 
included in the physical inventory count, as might goods owned by third parties but held by 
companies on consignment or for storage. Companies have even made up pallets of 
inventory with hollow centers, placed bricks in sealed boxes instead of high value products, 
and shuttled inventory overnight between locations being observed by auditors on different 
days so as to double count the inventory. Finally, it is also common for companies to insert 
phony count sheets during the inventory observation or change the quantities on the  
count sheets. 
 
Accounts Receivable  
Accounts receivable are subject to manipulation in the same manner as sales and inventory, 
and in many cases, the schemes are conducted together. The two most common schemes 
involving accounts receivable are fictitious receivables and failure to write off accounts 
receivable as bad debts (or failure to establish an adequate allowance for bad debts). 
Fictitious receivables commonly arise from fictitious revenues, which were discussed earlier. 
Accounts receivable should be reported at net realizable value, that is, the amount of the 
receivable less the amount expected not to be collected.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.319 
FICTITIOUS ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE  
Fictitious accounts receivable are common among companies with financial problems, as 
well as with managers who receive a commission based on sales. The typical entry under 
fictitious accounts receivable is to debit (increase) accounts receivable and credit (increase) 
sales. Of course, these schemes are more common around the end of the accounting period, 
since accounts receivable are expected to be paid in cash within a reasonable time. 
Fraudsters commonly attempt to conceal fictitious accounts receivable by providing false 
confirmations of balances to auditors. They get the audit confirmations because the mailing 
address they provide for the phony customers is typically either a mailbox under their 
control, a home address, or the business address of a coconspirator. Such schemes can be 
detected by using business credit reports, public records, or even the telephone book, to 
identify significant customers with no physical existence or no apparent business need for 
the product sold to them. 
 
FAILURE TO WRITE DOWN 
Companies are required to accrue losses on uncollectible receivables when the criteria in 
Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, are met. 
Companies struggling for profits and income may be tempted to omit the recognition of 
such losses because of their negative impact on income.  
 
Business Combinations 
Companies are required to allocate the purchase price they have paid to acquire another 
business to the tangible and intangible assets of that business. Any excess of the purchase 
price over the value of the acquired assets is treated as goodwill. Current standards 
governing goodwill accounting have decreased the incentive for companies to minimize the 
amount allocated to goodwill that previously was required to be amortized against future 
earnings. However, companies may still be tempted to over-allocate the purchase price to in-
 process research and development assets, in order to then write them off immediately. Or 
they may establish excessive reserves for various expenses at the time of acquisition, 
intending to quietly release those excess reserves into earnings at a future date.  
 
Fixed Assets  
Bogus fixed assets can be created by a variety of methods. They are subject to manipulation 
through several different schemes. Some of the more common schemes are booking 
fictitious assets, misrepresenting asset valuation, and capitalizing non-asset costs. 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.320                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BOOKING FICTITIOUS ASSETS 
One of the easiest methods of asset misrepresentation is the recording of fictitious assets. 
This false creation of assets affects account totals on a company’s balance sheet. The 
corresponding account commonly used is the owners’ equity account. Because company 
assets are often physically found in many different locations, this fraud can sometimes be 
easily overlooked. One of the most common fictitious asset schemes is to simply create 
fictitious documents. In other instances, the equipment is leased, not owned, and this fact is 
not disclosed during the audit of fixed assets. Bogus fixed assets can sometimes be detected 
because the fixed asset addition makes no business sense. 
 
MISREPRESENTING THE VALUE OF FIXED ASSETS 
Fixed assets should be recorded at cost. Although assets may appreciate in value, this 
increase in value should not be recognized on company financial statements. Many financial 
statement frauds have involved the reporting of fixed assets at market values instead of the 
lower acquisition costs, or at even higher inflated values with phony valuations to support 
them. Further, companies may falsely inflate the value of fixed assets by failing to record 
impairments of long-lived assets (as required by FASB ASC 350-30-35) and of goodwill (as 
required by FASB ASC 350-20-35). Misrepresentat ion of asset values frequently goes hand 
in hand with other schemes.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In October 2002, the SEC filed a civil enforcement action against former Enron CFO 
Andrew S. Fastow, who also faced criminal charges, relating to an alleged self-enriching 
scheme to defraud Enron’s security holders through the use of  certain off-balance-sheet 
entities. One of the six transactions in the SEC’s complaint against Andrew Fastow 
involved Raptor I and Avici. According to the complaint, Enron and the Fastow-
 controlled partnership LJM2 engaged in complex transactions with an entity called Raptor 
I. Raptor I was used to manipulate Enron’s balance sheet and income statement and to 
generate profits for LJM2 and Fastow at Enron’s expense. In September 2000, Fastow 
and others used Raptor I to effectuate a fraudulent hedging transact ion and thus avoid a 
decrease in the value of Enron’s investment in  the stock of a public company called Avici 
Systems Inc. Specifically, Fastow and others back-dated documents to make it appear that 
Enron had locked in the value of its investment in Avici in August of 2000, when Avici’s 
stock was trading at its all time high price. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.321 
CAPITALIZING NON-ASSET COSTS 
Excluded from the cost of a purchased asset are interest and finance charges incurred in the 
purchase. For example, when a company finances a capital equipment purchase, monthly 
payments include both principal liability reduction and interest payments. On initial 
purchase, only the original cost of the asset should be capitalized. The subsequent interest 
payments should be charged to interest expense and not to the asset. Without a reason for 
intensive review, fraud of this type can go unchecked.  
 
Understating Assets 
In some cases, as with some government-related or -regulated companies, it is advantageous 
to understate assets. Additional funding is often based on asset amounts. This 
understatement can be done directly or through improper depreciation. 
 
Misclassifying Assets 
In order to meet budget requirements, and for various other reasons, assets are sometimes 
misclassified into general ledger accounts in which they don’t belong. For example, fixed 
assets may be fraudulently reclassified as current assets. The manipulation can skew financial 
ratios and help the company comply with loan covenants or other borrowing requirements.  
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Asset Valuation? 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Significant declines in customer demand and increasing business failures in either the 
industry or the overall economy. 
• Assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve 
subjective judgments or uncertainties that are difficult to support. 
• Non-financial management’s excessive part icipation in or preoccupation with the 
selection of accounting principles or the determination of significant estimates.  
• Unusual increase in gross margin or margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Unusual growth in the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio. 
• Unusual growth in the number of days’ purchases in inventory ratio. 
• Reduction in allowances for bad debts, excess inventory, obsolete inventory, etc., 
especially if relevant ratios are out of line with those of industry peers. 
• Unusual change in the relationship between fixed assets and depreciation. 
• Adding to assets while competitors are reducing capital tied up in assets. 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.322                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Concealed Liabilities and Expenses 
Understating liabilities and expenses is one of the ways financial statements can be 
manipulated to make a company appear more profitable than it actually is. Because pre-tax 
income will increase by the full amount of the expense or liability not recorded, this financial 
statement fraud method can have a significant impact on reported earnings with relatively 
little effort by the fraudster. It is much easier to commit than falsifying sales transactions. 
Missing transactions can also be harder for auditors to detect than improperly recorded ones 
since the missing transactions leave no audit trail. 
 
There are three common methods for concealing liabilities and expenses:  
• Liability/expense omissions 
• Capitalized expenses 
• Failure to disclose warranty costs and liabilities 
 
Liability/Expense Omissions  
The preferred and easiest method of concealing liabilities or expenses is to simply fail to 
record them. Multi-million-dollar judgments ag ainst a company from a recent court decision 
might be conveniently ignored. Vendor invoices might be thrown away or stuffed into 
drawers rather than posted into the accounts payable system, thereby increasing reported 
earnings by the full amount of the invoices. In a retail environment, debit memos might be 
created for chargebacks to vendors, supposedly to claim permitted rebates or allowances but 
sometimes solely to create additional income. Whether or not these items are properly 
recorded in a subsequent accounting period does not change the fraudulent nature of the 
current financial statements. 
 
Often, perpetrators of liability and expense omissions believe they can conceal their frauds in 
future periods. They frequently plan to compensate for their omitted liabilities with visions 
of other income sources such as profits from future price increases. 
 
Just as they are easy to conceal, omitted lia bilities are probably one of the most difficult 
schemes to uncover. A thorough review of all post-financial-statement-date transactions, 
such as accounts payable increases and decreases, can aid in the discovery of omitted 
liabilities in financial statements, as can a computerized analysis of expense records. 
Additionally, if the auditor requested and was granted unrestricted access to the client’s files, 
a physical search could turn up concealed invoices and unposted liabilities. Probing 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.323 
interviews of accounts payable and other personnel can reveal unrecorded or delayed items 
too.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In July 2002, the SEC filed suit in the United States Dis trict Court for the Southern 
District of New York, charging major cable television producer Adelphia Communications 
Corporation (“the Company” or “Adelphia”); its founder John J. Rigas; his three sons, 
Timothy J. Rigas, Michael J. Rigas, and James P. Rigas; and two senior executives at 
Adelphia, James R. Brown and Michael C. Mulcahey, in one of the most extensive 
financial frauds ever to take place at a public company. The SEC charged that Adelphia, 
at the direction of the individual defendants (1) fraudulently excluded over $2.3 billion in 
liabilities from its consolidated financial statements by hiding them in off balance sheet 
affiliates; (2) falsified operations statistics and inflated Adelphia’s earnings to meet Wall 
Street’s expectations; and (3) concealed rampant self-dealing by the Rigas Family, 
including the undisclosed use of corporate fu nds for Rigas Family stock purchases and the 
acquisition of luxury condominiums in New York and elsewhere. 
 
With respect to the concealed liabilities, the complaint alleged that between mid-1999 and 
the end of 2001, John J. Rigas, Timothy J. Ri gas, Michael J. Rigas, James P. Rigas, and 
James R. Brown, with the assistance of Michael C. Mulcahey, caused Adelphia to 
fraudulently exclude from the Company’s a nnual and quarterly consolidated financial 
statements over $2.3 billion in bank debt by deliberately shifting those liabilities onto the 
books of Adelphia’s off balance sheet, unconsolidated affiliates. Failure to record this debt 
violated GAAP requirements and precipitated a series of misrepresentations about those 
liabilities by Adelphia and the defendants, including the creation of (1) sham transactions 
backed by fictitious documents to give the false appearance that Adelphia had actually 
repaid debts when, in truth, it had simply shi fted them to unconsoli dated Rigas-controlled 
entities, and (2) misleading financial statements  by giving the false impression through the 
use of footnotes that liabilities listed in the Company’s financials included all outstanding 
bank debt. 
 
In November 2002, in exchange for his testimony against the Rigas men, James Brown 
was released from prosecution by  consenting to an entry of a permanent injunction against 
him for federal securities law violations. Additionally, Brown has been permanently barred 
from becoming an officer or director of a public corporation.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.324                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In July 2004, after a three-month trial, a federal jury convicted John and Timothy Rigas of 
conspiracy, securities fraud, and bank fraud. John Rigas received a 15-year prison sentence 
and was fined $2,300, and Timothy Rigas was sentenced to 20 years in prison. James 
Rigas was never criminally charged by the Court. In November 2005, Michael Rigas 
pleaded guilty to a charge of making a false entry in a financial record. 
 
In April 2005, the SEC filed permanent injunctions against John, Timothy, Michael, 
and James Rigas, as well as James Brown, Michael Mulcahey, and Adelphia 
Communications Corporation. The defendants were charged with violating anti-fraud, 
periodic reporting, record keep ing, and internal control provisions of federal securities laws. 
In addition, the Rigas family members were barred from ever holding officer or director 
positions in a public company.  
 
Capitalized Expenses  
Capitalizing expenses is another way to increase income and assets because capitalized items 
are depreciated or amortized over a period of years rather than expensed immediately. If 
expenditures are capitalized as assets and not expensed during the current period, income 
will be overstated. As the assets are depreciated, income in subsequent periods will be 
understated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In November 2002, the SEC filed an am ended complaint against WorldCom, Inc., 
broadening its charges to allege that WorldCom  misled investors from at least as early as 
1999 through the first quarter of 2002. The complaint stated that the company had 
acknowledged that during that period Worl dCom materially overstated the income it 
reported on its financial statements by approx imately $9 billion, main ly using two methods. 
First, WorldCom reduced its operating expenses  by improperly releasing as a credit to 
operating expenses certain provisions previously established for line costs and for taxes. 
Second, the company improperly reduced its operating expenses by recharacterizing certain 
expenses as capital assets. Much  of the $9 billion related to  improper accounting for “line 
costs,” which were among WorldCom’s major operating expenses. The SEC complaint 
alleges that, in a scheme directed and approved by members of senior management, 
WorldCom concealed the true extent of its “l ine costs.” By improperly reducing provisions 
held against “line costs” and by transferring  certain “line costs” to its capital asset 
accounts, WorldCom falsely portrayed itself as a profitable business when it was not and 
concealed large losses. These improp er accounting practices were designed to and did inflate 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.325 
income to correspond with estimates by Wall Street analysts and to support the price of 
WorldCom’s stock. 
 
In March 2005, former WorldCom CEO Bernard Ebbers was convicted of one count of 
conspiracy, one count of securities fraud, and seven counts of false regulatory filing, and was 
later sentenced to 25 years in prison. He also agreed to forfeit nearly all of his personal 
assets to settle a civil suit filed by aggrieved WorldCom investors.  
 
Scott Sullivan, the former CFO under Ebbers and “the architect” behind the fraud 
scheme, pled guilty to fraud charges and agreed to testify against Ebbers. Due to his 
cooperation during the investigation, he was sentenced to only five years in prison. He also 
agreed to forfeit the proceeds from the sale of his $10 million home, along with his 401(k) 
holdings, to settle the civil suit brought by shareholders.  
 
Former WorldCom Controller David F. Myers and former Director of General 
Accounting Buford “Buddy” Yates, Jr., pled gu ilty to criminal charges prosecuted by the 
U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York. Myers received a sentence  
of one year and one day in prison. Yates was also sentenced to one year and one day in 
prison and ordered to pay a $5,000 fine. Additionally, each man was permanently 
enjoined from acting as an officer or director  of any public company and was suspended from 
practicing before the SEC as an accountan t, under Rule 102(2) of the Commission’s 
Rules of Practice.  
 
The SEC also brought civil actions against former members of the WorldCom General 
Accounting Department, Betty L. Vinson, CPA and Troy M. Normand. Both were 
permanently enjoined from securities violation s. Vinson was suspended from appearing or 
practicing before the SEC as an accountant. In addition, she pled guilty to one count of 
securities fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud and was sentenced to 
five months in prison and five  months of house arrest. Norm and pled guilty to similar 
charges and received three years of probation for his role in the fraud.  
 
EXPENSING CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 
Just as capitalizing expenses is improper, so is expensing costs that should be capitalized. 
The organization may want to minimize its net income due to tax considerations, or to 
increase earnings in future periods. Expensing an item that should be depreciated over a 
period of time helps to accomplish just that—net income is lower and, therefore, so are 
taxes.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.326                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Returns and Allowances and Warranties   
Improper recording of sales returns and allowances occurs when a company fails to properly 
record or present the expense associated with sales returns and customer allowances 
stemming from customer dissatisfaction. It is inevitable that a certain percentage of products 
sold will, for one reason or another, be returned. When this happens, management must 
record the related expense as a contra-sales account, which reduces the amount of net sales 
presented on the company’s income statement.  
 
Likewise, when a company offers a warranty on product sales, it must estimate the amount 
of warranty expense it reasonably expects to incur over the warranty period and accrue a 
liability for that amount. In warranty liability fraud, the warranty liability is usually either 
omitted altogether or substantially understated. Another similar area is the liability resulting 
from defective products (product liability). 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Concealed Liabilities and Expenses? 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve 
subjective judgments or uncertainties that are difficult to support. 
• Non-financial management’s excessive part icipation in or preoccupation with the 
selection of accounting principles or the determination of significant estimates. 
• Unusual increase in gross margin or margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Allowances for sales returns, warranty claims, etc., that are shrinking in percentage terms 
or are otherwise out of line with industry peers. 
• Unusual reduction in the number of days’ purchases in accounts payable ratio. 
• Reducing accounts payable while competitors are stretching out payments to vendors. 
 
Improper Disclosures 
Accounting principles require that financial statements include all the information necessary 
to prevent a reasonably discerning user of the financial statements from being misled. The 
notes should include narrative disclosures, supporting schedules, and any other information 
required to avoid misleading potential investors, creditors, or any other users of the financial 
statements.  
 
Management has an obligation to disclose all significant information appropriately in the 
financial statements and in management’s discussion and analysis. In addition, the disclosed 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.327 
information must not be misleading. Improper disclosures relating to financial statement 
fraud usually involve the following: 
• Liability omissions 
• Subsequent events 
• Management fraud 
• Related-party transactions 
• Accounting changes 
 
Liability Omissions 
Typical omissions include the failure to disclose loan covenants or contingent liabilities. 
Loan covenants are agreements, in addition to or as part of a financing arrangement, that a 
borrower has promised to keep as long as the financing is in place. The agreements can 
contain various types of covenants, including certain financial ratio limits and restrictions on 
other major financing arrangements. Contingent liabilities are potential obligations that will 
materialize only if certain events occur in the future. A corporate guarantee of personal loans 
taken out by an officer or a private company controlled by an officer is an example of a 
contingent liability. The company’s potential lia bility, if material, must be disclosed.  
 
Subsequent Events 
Events occurring or becoming known after the close of the period may have a significant 
effect on the financial statements and should be disclosed. Fraudsters typically avoid 
disclosing court judgments and regulatory decisions that undermine the reported values of 
assets, that indicate unrecorded liabilities, or that adversely reflect upon management 
integrity. Public record searches can reveal this information.  
 
Management Fraud 
Management has an obligation to disclose to the shareholders significant frauds committed 
by officers, executives, and others in positions of trust. Withholding such information from 
auditors would likely also involve lying to auditors, an illegal act in itself.  
 
Related-Party Transactions 
Related-party transactions occur when a company does business with another entity whose 
management or operating policies can be controlled or significantly influenced by the 
company or by some other party in common. There is nothing inherently wrong with 
related-party transactions, as long as they are fully disclosed. If the transactions are not 
conducted on an arm’s-length basis, the company may suffer economic harm, injuring 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.328                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
stockholders. The financial interest that a company official might have may not be readily 
apparent. For example, common directors of two companies that do business with each 
other, any corporate general partner and the partnerships with which it does business, and 
any controlling shareholder of the corporation with which he/she/it does business may be 
related-parties. Family relationships can also be considered related parties, such as all lineal 
descendants and ancestors, without regard to financial interests. Related-party transactions 
are sometimes referred to as “self-dealing.” While these transactions are sometimes 
conducted at arm’s length, often they are not.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In September 2002, the SEC charged former top executives of Tyco International Ltd., 
including former CEO L. Dennis Kozlowski, with violating the federal securities laws by 
failing to disclose to shareholders hundreds of millions of dollars of low-interest and interest-free 
loans they took from the company, and in some cases, never repaid. The SEC 
complaint, which also charged former Tyc o CFO Mark H. Swartz and Chief Legal 
Officer Mark A. Belnick, alleges that the three former executives also sold shares of Tyco 
stock valued at millions of dollars while their self-dealing remained undisclosed. The 
complaint alleges numerous improper transact ions, including Kozlowski’s use of $242 
million of loans for impermissible and una uthorized purposes, including funding an 
extravagant lifestyle. With these undisclosed loans, Kozlowski allegedly amassed millions of 
dollars in fine art, yachts, and estate jewelry, as well as a $31 million Park Avenue 
apartment and a palatial estate in Nantucket.  Kozlowski and Swartz allegedly engaged in 
undisclosed non-arm’s-length real estate transactions with Tyco or its subsidiaries and 
received undisclosed compensation and perqui sites, including forgiveness of multi-million- 
dollar loans, rent-free use of large New York apartments, and use of corporate aircraft for 
personal purposes at little or no cost. 
 
In July 2004, Belnick was acquitted of all the charges brought against him. In a separate 
trial, Kozlowski and Swartz were each found gu ilty of 22 charges, in cluding grand larceny, 
falsifying business records, cons piracy, and securities fraud, and were sentenced to eight and 
one-third to 25 years in prison. 
 
Accounting Changes 
In general, three types of accounting changes must be disclosed to avoid misleading the user 
of financial statements: accounting principles, estimates, and reporting entities. Although the 
required treatment for each type of change is different, they are all susceptible to 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.329 
manipulation by a determined fraudster. For example, fraudsters may fail to properly 
retroactively restate financial statements for a change in accounting principle if the change 
causes the company’s financial statements to appear weaker. Likewise, they may fail to 
disclose significant changes in estimates such as the useful lives and estimated salvage values 
of depreciable assets, or the estimates underlying the determination of warranty or other 
liabilities. They may even secretly change the reporting entity, by adding entities owned 
privately by management or by excluding certain company-owned units, in order to improve 
reported results.  
 
Backdating Stock Options 
As a supplement to salary, companies frequently offer employees stock options, which grant 
the recipient the privilege to purchase a share of the company’s stock at a future date for a 
specific price called the strike price. A strike price is the value of a share at a particular date. 
Generally, the strike price is set at the price of the underlying stock on the day the option is 
granted; therefore, the option becomes valuable only with future increases in the stock price.  
In this way, companies grant stock options as an incentive for employees to boost company 
performance and thus raise the stock price. The practice of backdating stock options, 
however, gives the employee a chance to profit by purchasing stock at past low prices, 
providing an immediate payoff. Backdating stock options occurs when a company alters the 
date of the grant to a time when the stock was trading at a lower price in the interest of 
making the option instantly valuable and further increasing the employee’s gain if the stock 
price continues to rise.  
 
EXAMPLE 
On June 1, 20X1, Company XYZ grants its CEO a stock option that provides the 
executive the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 20X2 for the 
strike price. Per its usual policy, the strike price is set at the price of the company stock on 
the date of the option grant. On June 1, 2008  (the grant date), XYZ stock was trading at 
$40 per share. Therefore, if the stock price increases to $45 per share by January 1, 
20X2, the CEO could exercise the option and purchase the shares for $40 per share, then 
sell them immediately on the market for $45 per share, resulting in a gain of $5 per share. 
However, the company has recently experienced a dramatic increase in its share price. On 
May 24, 20X1, the stock was trading for $15 per share. To provide the CEO with an 
opportunity to exploit this increase in share price, the company chooses to backdate the 
stock options to make it appear that they  were granted on May 24, 20X1. Because the 
strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date, the strike price is 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.330                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
effectively changed to $15 per share. As a result, the CEO now has the option to buy 100 
shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 20X2 for $15 per share. Thus, the CEO has 
immediately gained $25 per share (the difference  between the stock price on the actual grant 
date of June 1 and the stated grant date of May 24) based solely on the manipulation of 
the grant date used.  
 
Backdating stock options came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) when academic research revealed a pattern of stock prices descending 
just prior to many reported dates of option grants, then ascending immediately afterwards. 
Backdating is not necessarily illegal, but can be if not handled appropriately. In order to be 
legal, the practice must be explicitly reported to shareholders and the government. Failure to 
do so may constitute securities fraud.  
 
In August of 2002, certain provisions laid out under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect, 
requiring companies to report stock option grants within two business days after the grants. 
The rules greatly reduced the time companies had to choose a favorable grant date; 
companies were previously allowed weeks or months before they were required to report 
stock option grants. Consequently, the apparent pattern of backdating nearly disappeared 
around the time the rules were enacted. However, reports of actual practices in stock options 
and the recorded data remain inconsistent in many cases because not all companies adhere 
to Sarbanes-Oxley. Additionally, the revelation of the prevalence of backdating has caused 
concern that companies may not have recorded and disclosed the option grants on the 
financial statements in an accurate manner. In response to this issue, the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) issued a practice alert to prepare auditors for the 
possibility of financial misstatements due to backdating of stock options. To keep a tight 
rope on the possibility of this type of illegal activity, auditors should assess the information 
obtained from the audit to determine if there is a need for further audit procedures. 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Disclosures? 
• Domination of management by a single person or small group (in a nonowner-managed 
business) without compensating controls. 
• Ineffective board of directors or audit committee oversight over the financial reporting 
process and internal control. 
• Ineffective communication, implementation, support, or enforcement of the entity’s 
values or ethical standards by management or the communication of inappropriate 
values or ethical standards. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.331 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry. 
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to a period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Significant related-party transactions not in the ordinary course of business or with 
related entities either not audited or audited by a different firm. 
• Significant bank accounts or subsidiary or branch operations in tax-haven jurisdictions 
for which there appears to be no clear business justification. 
• Overly complex organizational structure invo lving unusual legal entities or managerial 
lines of authority. 
• Known history of violations of securities la ws or other laws and regulations, or claims 
against the entity, its senior management, or board members alleging fraud or violations 
of laws and regulations. 
• Recurring attempts by management to justify marginal or inappropriate accounting on 
the basis of materiality. 
• Formal or informal restrictions on the auditor that inappropriately limit access to people 
or information, or limit the ability of the auditor to communicate effectively with the 
board of directors or audit committee. 
 
 
What Red Flags Are Associated with Financial Statement Fraud Generally? 
Red flags associated with particular financial statement fraud schemes have been discussed 
above. There are many red flags associated with financial statement fraud generally. An 
extensive list of such red flags can be found in an appendix to AU section 316, Consideration 
of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, where they are called “risk factors.” Some red flags 
indicate increased vulnerability to financial statement fraud; others indicate a greater 
likelihood that financial statement fraud has occurred. 
 
Some of the more significant red flags listed in AU section 316 are: 
• Domination of management by a single person or small group (in a nonowner-managed 
business) without compensating controls. 
• Profitability or trend level expectations of investment analysts, institutional investors, 
significant creditors, or other external parties (particularly expectations that are unduly 
aggressive or unrealistic), including expectations created by management in, for example, 
overly optimistic press releases or annual report messages. 
• Ineffective communication, implementation, support, or enforcement of the entity’s 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.332                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
values or ethical standards by management, or the communication of inappropriate 
values or ethical standards.  
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Rapid growth or unusual profitability, especially compared to that of other companies in 
the same industry. 
• Significant, unusual, or highly complex transactions, especially those close to a period’s 
end that pose difficult “substance over form” questions. 
• Significant related-party transactions not in the ordinary course of business or with 
related entities not audited or audited by another firm. 
• Recurring attempts by management to justify marginal or inappropriate accounting on 
the basis of materiality. 
• Formal or informal restrictions on the auditor that inappropriately limit access to people 
or information, or limit the ability of the auditor to communicate effectively with those 
charged with governance. 
 
 
Detection of Fraudulent Financial Statement Schemes 
To better understand basic accounting concepts and to see how an analysis of accounting 
records and procedures can reveal a fraud, consider the following example: 
  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.333 
EXAMPLE 
Jackson Hardware Supply is a medium-sized pl umbing and electrical wholesale distributor. 
On December 31, the balance sheet and income statement were as follows: 
 
Jackson Hardware Supply  
Balance Sheet  
As of December 31  
 
 Assets  Liabilities & Owners’ Equities   
    
 Cash $2,427,000  Liabilities  
 Accounts Receivable 300,000    Accounts Payable $ 300,000
  Inventory 300,000    Salaries Payable 70,000
  Supplies 11,000    Rent Payable    50,000
  Prepaid Insurance 44,000    Deferred Taxes Payable    438,000
  Equipment   440,000    Total Liabilities 858,000
     
   Owners’ Equities  
     Common Stock $2,000,000
      Retained Earnings      664,000
      Total Owners’ Equity 2,664,000
   
Total Assets 
 
$3,522,000
    
 Total Liabilities & 
   Owners’ Equity 
 
$3,522,000
  
 
Jackson Hardware Supply  
Income Statement  
For the year ending December 31  
  
 Revenues   
 Sales Revenue $3,470,000  
 Cost of Goods Sold (2,100,000)  
 Gross Profit from Sales 1,370,000  
 Rent Revenue      10,000  
  Gross Profit   $ 1,380,000 
  
 General and Administrative Expenses  
 Insurance Expense $4,000
  Salary Expense 220,000
  Supplies Expense 14,000
  Rental Expense    40,000
     
  Total General and 
Administrative Expenses 
  
(278,000) 
  Net Income Before Taxes 1,102,000 
  Income Taxes    (438,000) 
  Net Income $  664,000  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.334                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An anonymous tip was received that the paymaster is stealing cash from the company. 
Lately, he has been seen driving a new BMW and has taken expensive vacations. The 
president of the company wants to follow up on the tip. Although the paymaster is a 
longtime, trusted employee, the president asks the fraud examiner to determine if the 
paymaster has been stealing. Although there are several ways to proceed with the 
investigation, the fraud examiner with accounting knowledge decides to first compare this 
year’s total salary expense with last year’s balance. He theorizes that if the paymaster is 
dishonest, he might be concealing the theft in the salaries expense account. Past experience 
has taught the fraud examiner to look  in the most obvious place first. 
 
The examiner notes that the balance of $220,000 in the salary expense account this year is 
significantly larger than the $180,000 balance last year. He asks the owner if there is an 
increase in the number of employees and how large across-the-board raises were this year. 
He discovers that the work force has not incr eased and all employees, including the owner, 
received 10 percent raises. He recalculates this year’s salaries by increasing last year’s 
salaries 10 percent and determines that the balance in the salary ex pense account should be 
approximately $198,000 ($180,000 x 1.10 = $198,000). He now believes that excess 
salaries went to someone.  
 
The next step is to follow the overstatement in salary expense backward from the income 
statement through the accounts and journal entries to the source documents—the payroll 
checks in this case. He finds that there are 12 checks payable to John Doe, an employee 
who quit in January of last year. He compares the endorsements on John Doe’s checks with 
those on the paymaster’s checks and notices di stinct similarities in the signatures. Armed 
with this evidence, he interviews the paymaster who confess es that he has stolen $22,000 
and concealed the theft by issuing payroll checks to a nonexistent employee, checks that he 
subsequently endorsed and cashed.  
 
Obviously, this example is relatively simple; but most fraud schemes are simple, especially 
for an examiner who understands concealment techniques and accounting. 
 
Other detection techniques are available for deter mining if the paymaster is stealing. These 
include running a computer listing of all employees who do not elect insurance coverage and 
other payroll withholdings (withholdings on fictitious employees create additional 
concealment problems for perpetrators), having someone else distribute the checks, and 
checking Social Security numbers of all active employees. Any of these methods might have 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.335 
revealed the spurious paychecks to John Doe. The approach shows, however, how an 
understanding of accounting can be invaluable for detecting fraud. 
 
 
Financial Statement Analysis  
Comparative financial statements provide information for current and past accounting 
periods. Accounts expressed in whole dollar amounts yield a limited amount of information. 
The conversion of these numbers into ratios or percentages allows the reader of the 
statements to analyze them based on their relationship to each other; in addition, it allows 
the reader to more readily compare current performance with past performance. In fraud 
detection and investigation, the determination of the reasons for relationships and changes 
in amounts can be important. These determinations are the red flags that point an examiner 
in the direction of possible fraud. If large enough, a fraudulent misstatement will affect the 
financial statements in such a way that relationships between the numbers become 
questionable. Many schemes are detected because  the financial statements, when analyzed 
closely, do not make sense. Financial statement analysis includes the following: 
• Vertical analysis 
• Horizontal analysis 
• Ratio analysis 
 
Percentage Analysis — Horizontal and Vertical  
There are traditionally two methods of percentage analysis of financial statements. Vertical 
analysis  is a technique for analyzing the relationships between the items on an income 
statement, balance sheet, or statement of cash flows by expressing components as 
percentages. This method is often referred to as “common sizing” financial statements. In 
the vertical analysis of an income statement, net sales is assigned 100 percent. For a balance 
sheet, total assets is assigned 100 percent on the asset side, and total liabilities and equity is 
expressed as 100 percent. All other items in each of the sections are expressed as a 
percentage of these numbers. 
 
Horizontal analysis  is a technique for analyzing the percentage change in individual financial 
statement items from one period to the next. The first period in the analysis is considered 
the base period, and the changes in the subsequent period are computed as a percentage of 
the base period. If more than two periods are presented, each period’s changes are computed 
as a percentage of the preceding period. As is the case with vertical analysis, this technique 
will not work for small, immaterial frauds.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.336                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following is an example of financial statements that are analyzed by both horizontal and 
vertical analysis: 
 
 
 
Vertical Analysis Discussion 
Vertical analysis  is the expression of the relationship or percentage of component items to a 
specific base item. In the above example, vertical analysis of the income statement includes 
total sales as the base amount, and all other items are then analyzed as a percentage of that 
total. Vertical analysis emphasizes the relationship of statement items wi thin each accounting 
period. These relationships can be used with historical averages to determine statement 
anomalies.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.337 
In the above example, we can observe that accounts payable makes up 29 percent of total 
liabilities in Year One. Historically, we may find that this account averages slightly over 25 
percent of total liabilities. In Year Two, accounts payable, as a percentage of total liabilities, 
increased to 51 percent. Although this increase may be explainable through a correlation 
with a rise in sales, such a significant increase could also be the starting point of a fraud 
examination. Source documents should be examined to determine the reason for the rise in 
this percentage. With this type of examination, fraudulent activity might be detected. The 
same type of change can be seen as selling expenses decline as a percentage of sales in Year 
Two from 20 percent to 17 percent. Again, this change may be explainable with higher 
volume sales or another bona fide explanation. But close examination may point a fraud 
examiner to uncover fictitious sales, since there was not a corresponding increase in selling 
expenses.  
 
Horizontal Analysis Discussion 
Horizontal statement analysis uses percentage comparison from one accounting period to the 
next. The percentage change is calculated by dividing the amount of increase or decrease for 
each item by the base period amount. The resulting percentages are then studied in detail. It 
is important to consider the amount of change as well as the percentage in horizontal 
comparisons. A 5 percent change in an account with a very large dollar amount may actually 
be much more of a change than a 50 percent change in an account with much less activity. 
 
In the above example, it is obvious that the 80 percent increase in sales has a much greater 
corresponding increase in cost of goods sold, which rose 140 percent. These accounts are 
often used to hide fraudulent expenses, withdrawals, or other illegal transactions.  
 
Ratios Analysis 
Ratio analysis  is a means of measuring the relationship between two different financial 
statement amounts. The relationship and comparison are the keys to the analysis. Many 
professionals, including bankers, investors, and business owners, as well as major investment 
firms, use this method. Ratio analysis allows for internal evaluations using financial statement 
data. Traditionally, financial statement ratios are compared to an entity’s industry averages. 
The ratios and comparisons can be very useful in detecting red flags for a fraud examination.  
 
The financial ratios present a significant change from one year to the next, or over a period 
of years, it becomes obvious that there may a problem. As in all other analysis, specific 
changes are often explained by changes in the business operations. Analyses change in 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.338                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 
Cash+Securities+Receivables
 Current Liabilities 
specific ratios is detected, the appropriate source accounts should be researched and 
examined in detail to determine if fraud has occurred. For instance, a significant decrease in 
a company’s current ratio may point to an incr ease in current liabilities or a reduction in 
assets, both of which could be used to cover fraud.  
 
In the analysis of financial statements, each reader of the statements will determine which 
portions are most important. Like the statement analysis discussed previously, the analysis of 
ratios is limited by its inability to detect fraud on a smaller, immaterial scale. Some of the 
types of financial ratio comparisons are shown below. 
 
Many of the possible ratios are used in industry-specific situations, but the nine comparisons 
mentioned below are ratios that may lead to discovery of fraud. The following calculations 
are based on the example financial statements presented earlier: 
 
Common Financial Ratios 
CURRENT RATIO 
The current ratio—current assets to current 
liabilities—is probably the most commonly used ratio in financial statement analysis. This 
comparison measures a company’s ability to meet  present obligations from its liquid assets. 
The number of times that current assets exceed current liabilities has long been a quick 
measure of financial strength.  
 
In detecting fraud, this ratio can be a prime indicator of manipulation of the accounts 
involved. Embezzlement will cause the ratio to decrease. Liability concealment will cause a 
more favorable ratio. 
 
In the case example, the drastic change in the current ratio from Year One (2.84) to Year 
Two (1.70) should cause an examiner to look at these accounts in more detail. For instance, 
a check-tampering scheme will usually result in a decrease in the current asset, cash, which 
will in turn decrease the ratio.  
 
QUICK RATIO 
The quick ratio, often referred to as the acid test ratio, 
compares the most liquid assets to current liabilities. This calculation divides the total of 
cash, securities, and receivables by current liabilities to yield a measure of a company’s ability 
to meet sudden cash requirements. The quick ratio is a conservative measure of liquidity that 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.339 
Net Sales on Account 
Average Net Receivables 
365 
Receivable Turnover 
Cost of Goods Sold 
Average Inventory 
is often used in turbulent economic times to provide an analyst with a worst-case scenario of 
a company’s working capital situation.  
 
An examiner will analyze the quick ratio for fraud indicators. In Year One of the example, 
the company balance sheet reflects a quick ratio of 2.05. This ratio drops to 1.00 in Year 
Two. In this situation, a closer review of accounts receivable shows they are increasing at an 
unusual rates, which could indicate that fictitious accounts receivable have been added to 
inflate sales. Of more concern perhaps is the increase in accounts payable, which might 
require, at a minimum, a closer review to determine why. 
 
RECEIVABLE TURNOVER 
Receivable turnover is defined as net sales on account 
divided by average net receivables. It measures the number of times accounts receivable is 
turned over during the accounting period. In other words, it measures the time between on-
 account sales and collection of funds. This ratio is one that uses both income statement and 
balance sheet accounts in its analysis. If the fraud includes fictitious sales, this bogus income 
will never be collected. As a result, the turnover of receivables will decrease.  
 
COLLECTION RATIO   
Accounts receivable aging is measured by the 
collection ratio. It divides 365 days by the receivable turnover ratio to arrive at the average 
number of days to collect receivables. In general, the lower the collection ratio, the faster 
receivables are collected. A fraud examiner may use this ratio as a first step in detecting 
fictitious receivables or larceny and skimming schemes. Normally, this ratio will stay fairly 
consistent from year to year, but changes in billing policies or collection efforts may cause a 
fluctuation. The example shows a favorable reduction in the collection ratio from 226.3 in 
Year One to 170.33 in Year Two. This means that the company is collecting its receivables 
more quickly in Year Two than in Year One.  
 
INVENTORY TURNOVER  
The relationship between a company’s cost of goods 
sold and average inventory is shown through the inventory turnover ratio. This ratio 
measures the number of times inventory is sold during the period. This ratio is a good 
determinant of purchasing, production, and sales efficiency. In general, a higher inventory 
turnover ratio is considered more favorable. For example, if cost of goods sold has increased 
due to theft of inventory (ending inventory has declined, but not through sales), then this 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.340                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
365 
Inventory Turnover 
Total Liabilities  
Total Equity 
Net Income 
Net Sales 
ratio will be abnormally high. In the case example, inventory turnover increases in Year Two, 
signaling the possibility that an embezzlement is buried in the inventory account. An 
examiner should investigate the changes in the components of the ratio to determine where 
to look for possible fraud. 
 
AVERAGE NUMBER OF DAYS INVENTORY IS IN STOCK  
The average number of days inventory is in stock ratio is a 
restatement of the inventory turnover ratio expressed in days. This rate is important for 
several reasons. An increase in the number of days inventory stays in stock causes additional 
expenses, including storage costs, risk of inventory obsolescence, and market price 
reductions, as well as interest and other expenses incurred due to tying up funds in inventory 
stock. Inconsistency or significant variance in this ratio is a red flag for fraud investigators. 
Examiners may use this ratio to examine inventory accounts for possible larceny schemes. 
Purchasing and receiving inventory schemes can affect the ratio. As well, understating the 
cost of goods sold will result in an increase in the ratio. Significant changes in the inventory 
turnover ratio are good indicators of possible fraudulent inventory activity. 
 
DEBT TO EQUITY RATIO  
The debt to equity ratio is computed by dividing total 
liabilities by total equity. This ratio is one that is heavily 
considered by lending institutions. It provides a clear picture of the relative risk assumed by 
the creditors and owners. The higher the ratio, the more difficult it will be for the owners to 
raise capital by increasing long-term debt. Debt to equity requirements are often included as 
borrowing covenants in corporate lending agreements. The example displays a very 
favorable Year One ratio of 0.89. Year Two, however, shows a ratio of 1.84, which indicates 
that debt is greatly increasing. In this case, the increase in the ratio corresponds with the rise 
in accounts payable. Sudden changes in this ratio may signal an examiner to look for fraud.  
 
PROFIT MARGIN    
Profit margin ratio is defined as net income divided by 
net sales. This ratio is often referred to as the efficiency ratio, in that it reveals profits earned 
per dollar of sales. This percentage of net income to sales relates not only the effects of gross 
margin changes, but also charges to sales and administrative expenses. As fraud is 
committed, net income will be artificially overstated, and the profit margin ratio will be 
abnormally high. False expenses and fraudulent disbursements will cause an increase in 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.341 
Net Sales 
Average Assets 
expenses and a decrease in the profit margin ratio. Over time, this ratio should be  
fairly consistent. 
 
ASSET TURNOVER 
Net sales divided by average operating assets is the 
calculation used to determine the asset turnover ratio. This ratio is used to determine the 
efficiency with which asset resources are utilized. The case example displays a greater use of 
assets in Year Two than in Year One. 
 
By performing an analysis of the financial statements, the examiner may be directed toward 
the direct evidence to resolve an allegation of fraud. After performing a financial statement 
analysis, the examiner can select statistical samples in the target account and eventually 
examine the source documents. If an irregularity of overstatement is suspected, begin the 
examination with the financial statements. If, however, an irregularity of understatement is 
suspected, begin the examination with a review of the source documents. This rule of thumb 
is especially effective in the area of omission of liabilities, such as litigation, contingent 
liabilities, leases, and some product warranties.  
 
Tax Return Review 
Tax returns are good sources of additional and comparative information on the operations 
of the business. A complete review and comparison to the financial statement may provide 
information unknown to the lender, or disclose unexplained discrepancies. Again, the lack of 
properly prepared or timely filed tax returns may be a method of stalling or not providing 
the required information. Most perpetrators of fraud are reluctant to continue the deception 
and falsify a tax return. Year-after-year extensions and filing of the tax returns on the last 
possible date could be a ploy to cover up financial statement and tax return differences. 
 
 
Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases 
For in-depth interviewing techniques, please refer to the “Interview Theory and 
Application” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial statement fraud does not occur in an isolated environment. People in organizations 
who have both motive and opportunity are the prime candidates to commit fraudulent 
misstatement. In the overwhelming majority of situations, two key managers participate 
actively in the fraud: the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer. Others 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.342                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
become involved largely out of necessity. Those who are not directly involved most often 
are not aware that anything is wrong.  
 
Investigations of financial statement frauds are unique in that they almost always involve 
interviewing the executive management of the organization. To detect or deter financial 
statement fraud, it is absolutely necessary that top management be interviewed by a 
competent and experienced fraud examiner who possesses the ability to solicit honest 
answers to tough — but vital— questions about whether anyone has tampered with the books.  
 
Interviewing Techniques 
Situations in which accountants are tempted to misstate financial statements most often 
involve pressure connected with financial performance. The following is a fictitious 
conversation between upper managers of a corporation. The example shows how the 
pressure to commit financial statement fraud can greatly influence accounting personnel. 
 
CFO: (To CEO) “Boss, it looks like we will not have a good year financially. We told 
the shareholders (or bank) that our earnings would be $4 a share, and it looks like we’ll 
be very lucky to even make $3.” 
 
CEO: “Well, what are we going to do about it? If we miss the earnings projections (or 
don’t get the loan) our gooses will be cooked; we’ll both lose our jobs. We must get those 
earnings up to where they should be.” 
 
CFO: “What do you mean?” 
 
CEO: “What I mean is that it is your job to bring in the numbers. You’re going to have 
to find a way to get them up. I’m sure we can probably make up the difference next year, 
but for now, you get our earnings/assets/equity up however you have to. All financial 
statements are essentially estimates anyhow. So you figure out how to ‘estimate’ the numbers 
more in our favor. I don’t know how to do it, and I don’t want you to tell me. But get it 
done.” 
 
The CFO faces a dilemma: cook the books or lose his job. The actions of the CFO are very 
hard to predict. If he steps over the edge, chances are he will need to enlist the aid of 
accounting and clerical personnel to carry out the details, even if these employees do not 
know what they are actually doing. For example, the CFO might tell the chief accountant to 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.343 
book certain receivables and income, which would produce the needed effect—pumping up 
the equity. Such a scheme might only be apparent to the real insiders.  
 
In order to detect financial statement frauds through interviews, management and key 
support staff must be interviewed. Fraud examiners and auditors (collectively referred to as 
“examiners”) must consider many import ant issues when conducting interviews. One 
important issue examiners should keep in mind when conducting interviews is that there is 
generally no liability in asking questions in which they have a legitimate interest, no matter 
how insulting the questions might be to the respondents. Examiners, therefore, have the 
legal right to be fearless in asking questions, as long as the questions are asked privately and 
under reasonable circumstances. This legal right doesn’t extend to accusations—only to 
questions. “Are you still cooking the books?” is an accusation, whereas, “Are you cooking 
the books?” is a question. It is important to know the difference and to frame questions 
accordingly.  
 
Examiners should also be sure to interview only one person at a time. Groups of people 
should not be interviewed together because members tend to influence each other. The 
interviews should always be conducted under private conditions, which permit the 
respondent to answer candidly. 
 
It is important that examiners aim to be nonthreatening in their interview approaches. The 
less threatening the interviewer appears, the less reluctant the respondent will be to answer 
questions. An interviewer should not be judgmental or show surprise or disgust; such actions 
can inhibit the flow of information.  
 
Examiners should warm up respondents thoroughly before asking sensitive questions. It is 
best to obtain all of the procedural information and information pertaining to internal 
controls prior to discussing fraud. Fraud should usually be the last thing covered in an 
interview.  
 
In order to reduce the possibility of offending respondents, examiners can explain the nature 
of their interests before asking sensitive questions. For example, an examiner can say “As you 
know, as an auditor, I am required to actively look  for fraud. This means I must ask you some direct 
questions about the subject. Do you understand?” Then, after obtaining a positive response, the 
examiner can proceed to ask questions about fraud. It is best to ask the least difficult 
questions first. 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.344                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another approach examiners can take to make tough interview questions more palatable is 
to phrase them hypothetically, especially during the beginning of the interview. For example, 
rather than asking a chief financial officer, “Have you committed fraud?” an examiner can 
say to the executive, “Suppose someone in the po sition of chief financial officer decided to 
pump up the financials. How would he do it?” The latter question is far more likely to illicit 
specific information than the former. Later in the interview, the executive should be asked 
specifically if he has committed the fraud. The examiner can say something along the lines of 
“My professional responsibilities require me to ask you one particularly sensitive direct 
question. Have you committed fraud or other illegal acts against the company?” The vast 
majority of respondents will answer “No” to  such a question without hesitation, whether 
they have or not; however, simply asking the question places the examiner in a much more 
favorable position if attacked professionally for not detecting a fraud. 
 
The Interview 
Fraud examiners and auditors should ask questions designed to elicit the most specific 
information possible in a professional manner.  
 
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
Generally, the CEO should be interviewed first in any proactive or reactive fraud situation. 
There are several good reasons for this approach. First of all, the auditor or fraud examiner 
must have a thorough understanding with management as to what his responsibilities in this 
area are. Second, it is unwise to conduct sensitive inquiries within any organization without 
first advising the CEO. If he learns from some other source that you are making discreet 
fraud-related inquiries without telling him, he is more likely to misunderstand your objectives 
and take the inquiry as a personal affront. Third, if there is any significant cooking of the 
books, the CEO is almost always involved. The fraud-related questions you should ask in 
connection with a regular audit should include, at a minimum, the following. Note how the 
questions are for “set up” purposes. 
 
1. Mr. CEO, as you know, we are required to assess the risk that material fraud exists in every company, 
not just yours. This is sort of a sensitive area for everyone, but our professional responsibilities dictate 
that we address this area. Do you understand? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding). 
 
2. Do you have any reason to believe that material fraud is being committed at any level within the 
organization? 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.345 
3. Mr. CEO, one trend in fraud is that small frauds  are committed by employees with little authority, 
which means that the largest ones are usually committed with the knowledge of upper management. Do 
you understand that? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding.) 
 
4. Because of that, we are required to at least look at the possibility that all CEOs, including you, might 
commit significant fraud against customers, investors,  or shareholders. Do you understand our situation? 
(Wait for an affirmative response.) 
 
5. So during this audit (examination) we need to ask direct questions ab out this subject to you and your 
staff. As a matter of fact, we will at least discuss the possibility of fraud with every employee we talk with 
in connection with this audit (exa mination). Do you have any problem with that? (Wait for a negative 
response. If the CEO protests, satisfy his objections. If he cannot be satisfied, assess the risk of whether 
the CEO is attempting to obstruct the audit or examination.) 
 
6. First, let’s look at your CFO. Can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the 
company by committing fraud? 
 
7. Has the CFO ever asked you to approve any financial transaction  you thought might be improper or 
illegal?   
 
8. Do you know whether the CFO has any outside business interests that might conflict with his duties 
here? 
 
9. Does the CFO employ any friends or relatives in the company? (Look for possible conflicts or sweetheart 
deals.) 
 
10.  What information do you have about the CFO’s lifestyle? (Look for expensive homes, cars, toys, and 
habits.) 
 
11.  What is your general impression of how the CFO gets along with his staff? (Look for abuses of 
authority, etc., that would motivate employees di rectly below the CFO to participate in fraud.) 
 
12.  How do you think fraud in your company compares with others in the same industry? 
 
13.  Of course, Mr. CEO, I must ask you many of the same questions about yourself. Is there any reason 
that anyone below you might claim you are committing fraud against the company? 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.346                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
14.  I must also ask you some personal financial quest ions. Do you have any problem with this? (Wait for 
negative response.) 
 
15.  Please give me a current estimate of your personal asset s, liabilities, income, and expenses. (List) What 
percentage of your net worth is tied directly to this  company? (Look for highly leveraged individuals whose 
company holdings are a significant portion of their net worth.) 
 
16.  Are you currently experiencing any personal financial problems? (Look for lawsuits, liens, judgments, or 
other indicators.)    
 
17.  Do you have friends or relatives working for this  company? (Look for conflicts of interest.) 
 
18.  Do you have friends or relatives working for major suppliers or vendors to this company? (Look for 
conflicts of interest.) 
 
19.  Do you own any portion of a company that does business  with this organization? (Look for conflicts of 
interest.) 
 
20.  Hypothetically, if you wanted to pump up your company’s profits, what would be the easiest way to do it? 
 
21.  As I said, we will be required to ask many questions of your staff. Is there any reason why someone who 
works for you would say you are at  risk to commit significant fraud against the company or its 
shareholders? 
 
22.  Mr. CEO, this is the last question, and it should be obvious why I have to ask it. Have you committed 
fraud or other illegal acts against the company? (Do not apologize for asking the question; it’s your job.)     
 
THE CEO’S TOP STAFF 
CEOs of corporations, large and small, are busy individuals. Because they tend to be “big 
picture” people by nature, they rely heavily on their staffs—principally their personal 
assistants—to take care of details. But personal assistants do not usually become closely tied 
to the boss without a demonstrated history of loyalty and discretion. In short, if you make 
the boss’s assistant mad, your fraud-related questions are going to be interpreted in the worst 
possible light, thereby making your job much more difficult. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.347 
So the key to interviewing the CEO’s top sta ff is to approach the interviewing process 
correctly from the outset. This means laying a great deal of groundwork before asking 
sensitive questions. Start with procedural matters or some other non-sensitive topic, and ask 
the fraud-related questions toward the end of your conversation. 
 
1. Mr. Assistant, part of my job as an auditor (fraud examiner) is to assess the risk that the company’s 
books are not materially correct as a result of fraud by employees or management. I have already talked 
about these issues with your boss. He understands their importance and he is aware that, as part of the 
audit, I will be talking to everyone about the subject to some extent. Do you have any problem with this? 
(Wait for negative response.) 
 
2. Do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in general? (Icebreaker.) 
 
3. How do you think this company stacks up to others in terms of honesty of its employees and managers? 
 
4. Have you ever heard rumors in the company that someone is committing fraud, especially someone high 
up in the organization? 
 
5. Is the company in any kind of financial trouble that would motivate management to misstate the 
company’s profits? 
 
6. Do you think your coworkers are essentially honest?  
 
7. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do something you felt was not legal or ethical? 
 
8. How would you handle such a situation? (Solic it information on fraud reporting program.) 
 
9. If someone in a position of authority in the company wanted to commit fraud, what would be the easiest 
way to do it? 
 
10.  As your auditor, may I ask you to report any instances in the future of anyone asking you to do anything 
to the books and records that you feel is not right? (Solicit future cooperation.) 
 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.348                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
In the vast majority of cases the CFO is an integral part of any financial statement fraud, as 
illustrated previously. As a result, the interview with the CFO should concentrate not only 
on possible motivations to commit fraud, but also on the opportunity to do so. Since most 
CFOs are accountants, they should more readily  understand your fraud-related mission. This 
can be good or bad; good if the CFO is hone st, and bad if he isn’t. Among all financial 
personnel, the CFO is in the best position to know how to cook the books and keep it from 
being uncovered. As if that weren’t enough, many CFOs are hired directly from the firms 
that audit the company. Is there any other person more likely to be at the center of the 
fraud?  
 
1. Mr. CFO, you now know that audit standards require us to actively assess the risk that material fraud 
could be affecting the financial statements. We have ta lked with the CEO, and he  is fully aware that we 
will be asking most everyone we  speak with about the possibility of fraud or irregularities. You 
understand this, don’t you? (Wait for affirmative response.) 
 
2. Of the accounts on the company’s books, which do  you suspect might be the most vulnerable to 
manipulation, and why? 
 
3. What kind of history does the company have with fraud in general, including defalcations and employee 
thefts? (Look for signs of a weak corporate culture.) 
 
4. We know that fraud usually exists to some extent—even if it is small—in most companies. How do you 
think your company compares to others? 
 
5. What is your overall impression of the company’s ethics and corporate culture? 
 
6. During our assessment of risk of fraud in your company, are there any specific ar eas you’d like to discuss 
with us? 
 
7. Is there any reason that anyone in  the company might say that management had a motive to misstate the 
financials? 
 
8. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do  anything with the books that you thought was 
questionable, unethical, or illegal?  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.349 
9. Are you involved in the personal finances of the CEO?  If so, is there anything about them that might 
make you think he is under personal financial pressure? 
 
10. Do either the CEO’s lifestyle or habits give you any reason to think he may be living beyond his means? 
 
11. Has anyone in a position of authority ever asked that you withhold in formation from the auditors, alter 
documents, or make fictitious en tries in the books and records? 
 
12.  Is there anything about your own background or finances that would cause someone to suspect that you 
had a motive for committing fraud? 
 
13.  Because of your importance as CF O, I must ask you one final question: Have you, yourself, committed 
fraud or illegal acts against this company? (Remember—don’t apologize.) 
 
THE ACCOUNTING STAFF 
If a financial statement fraud has been ordered by the CFO, he will either do the actual dirty 
work himself or get his staff to do it. In some cases, the staff will understand the big picture, 
but in most situations, the employee is told only what he needs to know. It is uncommon for 
a CFO to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cooking the books.  
 
As a result, the examiner generally must complete his audit work before beginning the 
interviews of the accounting staff. This will allow specific transactions to be discussed with 
the people who actually entered them into the company’s records. For example, all thorough 
audits will examine the major journal entries. Frequently, these journal entries will be ordered 
by the CFO, but actually entered by a staff member. There would generally be no record of 
the CFO requesting the entry, so this fact must be established through interviews.  
 
Interviews of the accounting staff will allow sufficient examination of procedures and 
controls over assets. After these questions are answered, you can generally pursue the line of 
inquiry suggested above for the CEO’s assistant. 
 
It should be noted that there are similarities and differences in the questions asked of the 
CEO, the CFO, and their staffs. In the case of the CEO and the CFO, both were specifically 
asked if they had committed fraud against the company, albeit in a nice way. The staffers 
were not asked that specific question.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.350                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The reasoning is this: significant financial statement fraud, as we have stated, generally 
originates with one or both of these two executives. Staffers have less motivation to engage 
in financial statement fraud, and are, therefore, at less risk to do so. They are also less likely 
to have the financial authority to enter transactions into the books without higher approval.  
 
So absent any specific information to the contrary, asking the employees point blank if they 
have committed fraud is less likely to produce information and more likely to offend them. 
But with the CFO and the CEO, asking the direct question will add measurably to the 
prevention of fraud. There are few defenses to not asking the question, other than the 
specter of embarrassing the executives you are auditing. That will, of course, sound pretty 
weak in a court of law where you are fighting for your professional life.  
 
 
Prevention of Financial Statement Fraud 
Prevention and deterrence of financial statement fraud consists of those actions taken to 
discourage the perpetration of fraud and limit the exposure, if fraud does occur.  
 
Internal Auditors 
Internal auditors are responsible for helping to deter fraud by examining and evaluating the 
adequacy and the effectiveness of controls, commensurate with the extent of the potential 
exposure in the various segments of an entity’s operations. The internal auditing standards 
state that the principal mechanism for deterring fraud is internal control. Primary 
responsibility for establishing and maintaining internal control rests with management. The 
Treadway Commission addresses this issue by recommending that internal audit departments 
or staffs have not only the support of top management, but also the necessary resources 
available to carry out their mission. The internal auditors’ responsibility is to aid management 
in the deterrence of fraud by evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of the company’s 
internal control system, as well as the company’s potential exposure to fraud, with particular 
consideration given to the five elements of internal control laid out by COSO.  
 
Management  
It is management’s respo nsibility to set the ethical tone of the organization. As with other 
types of occupational fraud and abuse, reducing the three factors that contribute to fraud 
will greatly help in the prevention of financial statement fraud. Reducing existing pressures 
to commit fraud, removing potential opportunities to commit fraud, and relieving possible 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.351 
rationalizations for committing fraud will greatly aid in the prevention of financial statement 
fraud. 
 
Reduce the Situational Pressures that Encourage Financial Statement Fraud 
• Avoid setting unachievable financial goals. 
• Eliminate external pressures that might tempt accounting personnel to prepare 
fraudulent financial statements. 
• Remove operational obstacles that block effective financial performance, such as 
working capital restraints, excess production volume, or inventory restraints. 
• Establish clear and uniform accounting procedures that do not contain exception 
clauses. 
 
Reduce the Opportunity to Commit Fraud 
• Maintain accurate and complete internal accounting records. 
• Carefully monitor the business transactions and interpersonal relationships of suppliers, 
buyers, purchasing agents, sales representatives, and others who interface in the 
transactions between financial units. 
• Establish a physical security system to secure company assets, including finished goods, 
cash, capital equipment, tools, and other valuable items. 
• Divide important functions between employees, separating total control of one area. 
• Maintain accurate personnel records, including background checks (where permitted by 
law) on new employees. 
• Encourage strong supervisory and leadership relationships within groups to ensure 
enforcement of accounting procedures. 
 
Reduce the Rationalization of Fraud — Strengthen Employee Personal Integrity  
• Managers should set an example by promot ing honesty in the accounting area. It is 
important that management practice what it preaches. Dishonest acts by management, 
even if they are directed at someone outside of the organization, create a dishonest 
environment that can spread to other business activities and other employees, both 
internal and external. 
• Honest and dishonest behavior should be defined in company policies. Organizational 
accounting policies should clear up any gray areas in accounting procedures. 
• The consequences of violating the rules, including the punishment of violators, should 
be clear. 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.401 



:


financi statement fraud
financi statement scheme ar on of a larg categori of fraud that fall under the head
of occup fraud and abus which is defin as the us of on occup for person
enrich through the deliber misus or misappl of the emploi organ
resourc or asset simpli state occup fraud ar those in which an employe
manag offic or owner of an organ commit fraud to the detriment of that
organ the three major type of occup fraud ar corrupt asset
misappropri and fraudul statement which includ financi statement scheme
the complet classif of occup fraud is shown below
financi statement fraud financi transact
1302 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1303
what is financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud is the deliber misrepresent of the financi condit of an
enterpris accomplish through the intent misstat or omiss of amount or
disclosur in the financi statement to deceiv financi statement user
financi statement fraud is usual a mean to an end rather than an end in itself when
peopl cook the book thei mai be do it to bui more time to quietli fix busi
problem that prevent their compani from achiev it expect earn or compli
with loan coven it mai also be done to obtain or renew financ that would not be
grant or would be smaller if honest financi statement were provid peopl who ar
intent on profit from crime mai commit financi statement fraud to obtain loan thei
can then siphon off for person gain or to inflat the price of the compani share
allow them to sell their hold or exercis stock option at a profit howev in mani
past case of financi statement fraud the perpetr have gain littl or noth
person in financi term instead the focu appear to have been preserv their statu
as leader of the organizationa statu that might have been lost had the real financi
result been publish promptli
financi statement fraud usual involv overst asset revenu and profit and
underst liabil expens and loss howev the overal object of the
manipul mai sometim requir the opposit action eg conceal overbudget result
in a good year in order to help the subsequ year which is expect to be tougher
the cost of financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud frequent ha a devast impact on the reput and the
financi posit of organ and peopl involv the stock market capit of
compani affect by financi statement fraud mai fall substanti almost overnight
lose billion of dollar for investor a 2006 report by the unit state govern
account offic gao06678 found that in the three trade dai surround the
initi announc of a restat the compani studi lost an adjust amount of 36
billion in market capit
financi statement fraud financi transact
1304 2011 fraud examin manual
mani job mai be lost as compani restructu re to try to restor profit as media
interview of former enron employe show financi statement fraud can exert a high
toll on the wellb of employe who mai lose their job their pension their save
invest in their employ stock and health care and other benefit the compani
auditor ar like to be su for the amount of investor loss which these dai mai mean
ten of billion of dollar for larg public compani for larg and small compani alik
financi statement fraud can be huge costli and potenti a corpor deathblow
why financi statement fraud is commit
there ar a number of reason why individu commit financi statement fraud most
commonli financi statement fraud is us to make a compani earn look better on
paper it sometim cover up the embezzl of compani fund financi fraud occur
through a varieti of method such as valuat judgment and fine point of time the
record of transact these more subtl type of fraud ar often dismiss as either
mistak or error in judgment and estim some of the more common reason why
peopl commit financi statement fraud includ
to encourag invest through the sale of stock
to demonstr increas earn per share or partnership profit interest thu
allow increas dividenddistribut payout
to cover inabl to gener cash flow
to dispel neg market percept
to obtain financ or to obtain more favor term on exist financ
to receiv higher purchas price for acquisit
to demonstr complianc with financ coven
to meet compani goal and object
to receiv performancerel bonus
thi limit list of reason show that the motiv for financi fraud doe not alwai
involv direct person financi gain sometim the caus of fraudul financi report
is the combin of situat pressur on either the compani or the manag and the
opportun to commit the fraud without the percept of be detect these pressur
ar known as red flag that is to sai if red flag situat pressur and opportun
ar present then the risk of financi report fraud increas significantli
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1305
exampl of situat pressur includ
sudden decreas in revenu or market share experienc by a compani or an industri
unrealist budget pressur particularli for shortterm result the pressur becom
even greater with arbitrarili establish budget that ar without refer to current
condit
financi pressur result from bonu plan that depend on shortterm econom
perform these pressur ar particularli acut if the bonu is a signific
compon of the individu total compens
opportun to commit fraud most often aris gradual gener these opportun can
stem from a lack of adequ oversight function within the compani the exist of an
oversight function doe not in and of itself guarante the detect of fraudul act the
oversight function must also respond effect the percept of detect not intern
control per se is arguabl the strongest deterr to fraud
some of the more obviou opportun for the exist of fraud ar
absenc of a board of director or audit committe
improp oversight or other neglect behavior by the board of director or audit
committe
weak or nonexist intern control includ an ineffect intern audit staff and a
lack of extern audit
unusu or complex transact an understand of the transact their compon
part and their impact on financi statement is paramount to fraud deterr
financi estim that requir signific subject judgment by manag
trend in financi statement fraud
financi statement fraud is estim to compris about 10 percent of all occup
fraud accord to the acf 2010 report to the nation on occup fraud a nd abus
fraudul statement compris 48 percent of the fraud report in the studi with a
median loss of 4100000 howev it is im portant to note that quot loss result
from financi statement fraud ar often measur lost market capit or lost
sharehold valu rather than direct loss of financi asset thi doe not make the scheme
ani less harm in fact the lost sharehold valu result from financi statement fraud
can have crippl effect on even the largest compani as we have seen with highprofil
financi statement fraud financi transact
1306 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud such as the enron and worldcom scandal it can also have a tremend impact on
the organ sharehold
similar result came out of a secur and exchang commiss sec studi requir
under the sarbanesoxlei act sox the agen cy wa charg with review incid of
financi statement fraud in the five year prior to passag of the legisl from juli 31
1997 through juli 30 2002 the sec file 51 5 enforc action for financi report
and disclosur violat aris out of 227 divis of enforc investig
enforc matter the 515 action includ 869 name parti consist of 164
entiti and 705 individu the yearoveryear number reveal the grow problem of
financi report violat dure the studi period
sourc sec report pursuant to section 704 of the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
httpwwwsecgovnewss tudiessox704reportpdf
most of the action involv improp revenu recognit in 126 of the 227 enforc
matter manag report fictiti sale improperli time revenu recognit or
improperli valu revenu anoth 101 enforc matter involv improp expens
recognit includ improp capit or deferr of expens improp us of
reserv or other understat of expens addition 23 enforc matter
involv improp account for busi combin and 137 enforc matter
involv other account and report issu such as inadequ manag
discuss and analysi mda disclosur and improp us of offbal sheet
arrang see the follow chart note the sum of the number in the second
column is greater than the total number of 227 becaus most of the action involv more
than on type of improp conduct
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1307
improp account practic number of enforc matter
involv each practic
improp revenu recognit 126
improp expens recognit 101
improp account in connect with busi
combin
23
other account and report issu 130
inadequ disclosur in mda and elsewher 43
failur to disclos relatedparti transact 23
inappropri account for nonmonetari and
roundtrip transact
19
improp account for foreign payment in violat
of the fcpa
6
improp us of of fbalanc sheet arrang 3
improp us of nongaap financi measur 2
sourc sec report pursuant to section 704 of the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
httpwwwsecgovnewss tudiessox704reportpdf
the sec studi reveal further proof of manag involv in financi statement
fraud in these enforc matter charg were brought against 75 chairmen of the board
111 chief execut offic ceo 111 presid 105 chief financi offic cfo 21
chief oper offic coo 16 chief account offic cao and 27 vice presid
vp of financ
studi by the us govern account offic gaoformerli known as the
gener account officealso reveal compar abl trend in financi statement fraud
in juli 2006 the gao issu an updat to it 2002 report financi statement restat
trend market impact regulatori respons and remain challeng the origin report wa
base on the gao analysi of 689 of 919 financi statement restat occur from
januari 1 1997 through june 30 2002 to updat the inform in the origin the gao
undertook a similar analysi of 1390 public compani restat that occur between
januari 1 2002 and septemb 30 2005 the follow ar some of the find of the two
studi
the percentag of publicli trade compani announc restat increas from
less than on percent in 1997 to over three percent by the end of 2002 thi percentag
rose again to 68 percent by septemb of 2005
the quantiti of restat result from account irregular grew from 92 in
1997 to 314 in 2002 or approxim 241 percent in the first 9 month of 2005
through septemb 30 there were 523 restat announc which amount to an
increas of approxim 67 percent from 2002 and more than 468 percent from 1997
financi statement fraud financi transact
1308 2011 fraud examin manual
the averag size of a compani restat it financi statement increas from 500
million in 1997 to 2 billion in 2002 by septemb 30 2005 the averag market
capit of a compani announc a restat had grown to 6 billion
cost and expens issu were the most common reason for restat between juli
2002 and septemb 2005 these restat which includ over or underst cost
or expens improp classif of cost and other misreport of cost account
for over 35 percent of restat examin dure that period in the 2002 studi cost
and expens issu were the second most common reason for restat compris
16 percent of all restat
twenti percent of the restat analyz in the 2006 studi were due to revenu
recognit issu make thi the second most common reason for restat dure
the period studi thi repres a declin from the 2002 studi in which revenu
recognit wa the most common reason for restat compris 38 percent of the
popul revenu recognit restat includ recogn revenu sooner or
later than allow under gaap or recogn question or fictiti revenu
todai financi statement and account fraud case continu to be the singl largest
categori of sec action file mani relat to the subprim mortgag market and anoth
larg group relat to execut compens most notabl the sec file civil suit
expand the scope of substant claim and remedi aggress appli the
clawback provis of section 304 of the sa rbanesoxlei act of 2002 and alleg fals
disclosur of nongaap financi metric in violat of regul g
in the summer of 2010 coso issu the fraudul financi report 19982 0 0 7 an
analysi of us public compani highlight of the report ar as follow
347 compani were involv in alleg incid of financi statement fraud dure the
10 year period
seventytwo percent of the case name the ceo and 65 percent name the cfo as
be associ with the fraud
the averag fraud last 314 month with the median fraud last 24 month
virtual all of the firm receiv an un qualifi audit opinion on the last set of
fraudul misstat financi statement
twenti percent of the fraud of public compani occur in the comput
hardwaresoftwar industri manufactur also repres 20 percent of the fraud
improp revenu recognit occur 61 percent of the fraud method overstat
of asset occur in 51 percent of the case understat of liabilitiesexpens
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1309
occur in 31 percent of the case insid trade wa cite in 24 percent of the case
as well
financi statement fraud scheme
fraud in financi statement typic take the form of
overst asset or revenu
underst liabil and expens
overst asset and revenu fals reflect a financi stronger compani by inclus
of fictiti asset cost or artifici revenu underst liabil and expens ar shown
through exclus of cost or financi oblig both method result in increas equiti
and net worth for the compani thi manipul result in increas earn per share or
partnership profit interest or a more stabl pictur of the compani true situat
howev in govern contract just the opposit mai be true
asset and revenu ar underst
liabil and expens ar overst
why as explain by govern auditor entiti mai reli on underst revenu or
overst expens to get more monei for a project or contract howev such scheme
ar by far the minor of financi statement fraud case
to demonstr the over and understat typic us to fraudul enhanc the
financi statement the scheme have been divid into five class becaus the mainten
of financi record involv a doubleentri system fraudul account entri alwai affect
at least two account and therefor at least two categori on the financi statement while
the area describ below reflect their financi statement classif keep in mind that the
other side of the fraudul transact exist elsewher it is common for scheme to involv
a combin of sever method the five classif of financi statement scheme ar
fictiti revenu
time differ
improp asset valuat
conceal liabil and expens
improp disclosur
financi statement fraud financi transact
1310 2011 fraud examin manual
fictiti revenu
fictiti or fabric revenu involv the record of sale of good or servic that did
not occur fictiti sale most often involv fake or phantom custom but can also
involv legitim custom for exampl a fictiti invoic can be prepar but not
mail for a legitim custom although the good ar not deliv or the servic ar not
render at the begin of the next account period the sale might be revers to help
conceal the fraud but thi mai lead to a revenu shortfal in the new period creat the
need for more fictiti sale anoth method is to us legitim custom and artifici
inflat or alter invoic reflect higher amount or quantiti than ar actual sold
gener speak revenu is recogn when it is 1 realiz or realiz and 2 earn
the secur and exchang commiss sec issu staff account bulletin sab
topic 13 revenu recognit now codifi in fasb asc 60510s99 to provid addit
guidanc on revenu recognit criteria and to rein in some of the inappropri practic
that had been observ fasb asc 60510s99 state that revenu is typic consid
realiz or realiz and earn when all of the follow criteria ar met
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
exampl of fictiti revenu
in on case a foreign subsidiari of a us compani record sever larg fictiti sale to
a seri of compani thei invoic the sa le but did not collect ani of the account
receiv which becam sever past due the manag of the foreign subsidiari arrang
for fals confirm of the account receiv for audit purpos and even hire actor to
pretend to be the custom dure a visit fr om us manag background check on
the custom would have reveal that some of the compani were fictiti while other
either were undisclos relat parti or oper in industri that would have no need for
the good supposedli suppli an investig reveal that the manag of the foreign
subsidiari direct the scheme to record fictiti revenu in order to meet unrealist
revenu goal set by us manag
in some case compani go to great length to conceal fictiti sale a sampl journal
entri from such a case is detail below a fiction entri is made to record a purport
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1311
purchas of fix asset thi entri debit fix asset for the amount of the alleg
purchas and the credit is to cash for the payment
date descript ref debit credit
1201x1 fix asset 104 350000
cash 101 350000
a fictiti sale entri is then made for the same amount as the fals purchas debit
account receiv and credit the sale account the cash outflow that supposedli paid
for the fix asset is return as payment on the receiv account though in practic
the cash might never have move if the fraudster didnt bother to falsifi that extra
documentari support
date descript ref debit credit
1201x1 account rec 120 350000
sale 400 350000
1215x1 cash 101 350000
account rec 120 350000
the result of thi complet fabric sequenc of event is an increas in both fix asset
and revenu the debit could altern have been direct to other account such as
inventori or account payabl or simpli left in account receiv if the fraud were
commit close to the year end and the receiv could be left outstand without
attract undu attent
sale with condit
sale with condit ar those that have term that have not been complet and the right
and risk of ownership have not pass to the purchas thei do not qualifi for record
as revenu these type of sale ar similar to scheme involv the recognit of revenu
in improp period sinc the condit for sale mai becom satisfi in the futur at
which point revenu recognit would becom appropri the recognit of revenu in
improp period is discuss further in the next section
what red flag ar associ with fictiti revenu
the follow red flag ar associ with fictiti revenu
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
financi statement fraud financi transact
1312 2011 fraud examin manual
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific transact with relat parti or special purpos entiti not in the ordinari
cours of busi or where those entiti ar not audit or ar audit by a separ
firm
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to the period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
unusu growth in the dai sale in receiv ratio receivablesaverag daili sale
a signific volum of sale to entiti whose substanc and ownership is not known
an unusu surg in sale by a minor of unit within a compani or in sale record
by corpor headquart
time differ includ prematur revenu recognit
financi statement fraud might also involv time differ that is the record of
revenu or expens in improp period thi can be done to shift revenu or expens
between on period and the next increas or decreas earn as desir
prematur revenu recognit
as previous mention revenu should be recogn in the account record when the
follow four criteria as set out in fasb asc 60510s99 have been satisfi
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
on or more of these criteria is typic not met when manag recogn revenu
prematur exampl of common problem with prematur revenu recognit ar set
out below
persuas evid of an arrang doe not exist
no written or verbal agreement exist
a verbal agreement exist but a written agreement is customari
a written order exist but is condit upon sale to end user such as a consign
sale
a written order exist but contain a right of return
a written order exist but a side letter alter the term in wai that elimin the requir
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1313
element for an agreement
the transact is with a relat parti which ha not been disclos
deliveri ha not occur or servic have not been render
shipment ha not been made and the criteria for recogn revenu on billandhold
transact set out in fasb asc 60510s99 have not been met
shipment ha been made not to the custom but to the seller agent an instal or to a
public warehous
some but not all of the compon requir for oper were ship
item of the wrong specif were ship
deliveri is not complet until instal custom test and custom accept
ha occur
servic have not been provid at all
servic ar be perform over an extend period and onli a portion of the servic
revenu should have been recogn in the current period
the mix of good and servic in a contract ha been misstat in order to improperli
acceler revenu recognit
the seller price to the buyer is not fix or determin
the price is conting upon some futur event
a servic or membership fee is subject to unpredict cancel dure the contract
period
the transact includ an option to exchang the product for other
payment term ar extend for a substanti period and addit discount or
upgrad mai be requir to induc continu us and payment instead of switch to
altern product
collect is not reason assur
collect is conting upon a futur event such as resal of the product receipt of
addit fund or litig
the custom doe not have the abil to pai for exampl it is financi troubl it
ha purchas far more than it can afford or it is a shell compani with minim asset
exampl
abc inc sell product that requir engin and adapt work befor thei ar
accept to custom howev the compani record sale revenu befor complet the
financi statement fraud financi transact
1314 2011 fraud examin manual
engin test evalu and custom accept stage of product in some case
sale do not take place for week or month in other case the sale ar specif
conting upon the custom trial and accept of the product
exampl
anoth compani is engag in the design develop manufactur market and
servic of comput peripher subsystem the compani recogn revenu prior to a time
when collect of the sale price wa reason assur and at a time prior to complet
of the underli sale transact
it wa the compani polici to recogn revenu when the product we re ship howev
the sale were not complet as of the time of shipment becaus custom were not oblig
to pai for the equip until it had been instal the compani had substanti
oblig to the custom for instal and adjust and there remain major
uncertainti concern the custom true willing to complet the transact becaus
of the volatil natur of the hightech product
longterm contract
longterm contract pose special problem for revenu recognit longterm construct
contract for exampl us either the completedcontract method or the percentageofcomplet
method depend partli on the circumst the completedcontract
method doe not record revenu until the project is 100 percent complet construct
cost ar held in an inventori account until complet of the project the percentageofcomplet
method recogn revenu and expens as measur progress on a project is
made but thi method is particularli vulner to manipul manag can often easili
manipul the percentageofcomplet and the estim cost to complet a construct
project in order to recogn revenu prematur and conceal contract overrun
multipl deliver
product and servic sale sometim involv multipl deliver or multipleel
arrang for exampl a cell phone compani provid a discount or free cell phone
to a custom who sign up for a twoyear servic agreement in thi situat the
deliver includ both the product cell phone and the servic which span two year in
multipleel arrang the seller complet the earn processand thu must
recogn revenueov a period of time
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1315
under fasb asc 60525 revenu recognitionmultipleel arrang compani ar
requir to estim the price of the individu compon in a multipleel sale
compani must then recogn the revenu relat to each of the compon as thei ar
deliv the inher inexact natur of the estim involv in thi process leav thi
revenu recognit method vulner to fraud as manag can manipul the estim
price of the individu compon in order to delai or acceler revenu recognit
channelstuf
a challeng area of revenu recognit that ha attract the attent of the sec is
known as channelstuf channelstuf refer to the sale of an unusu larg
quantiti of a product to distributor who ar encourag to overbui through the us of deep
discount or extend payment term thi practic is especi attract to industri with
high gross margin such as tobacco pharmaceut perfum soda concentr and
brand consum good becaus it can increas shortterm earn on the downsid
howev steal from futur period sale make it harder to achiev sale goal in those
futur period the pressur to meet sale goal can in turn lead to increasingli disrupt
level of channelstuf and ultim to a restat although order ar receiv the
term of the order might rais question about the collect of the account receiv
and ani exist side agreement that grant a right of return mai effect turn the sale
into consign sale also there might be a greater risk of return for certain product if
thei cannot be sold befor their shelf life end
in recent year the sec ha brought enforc action or charg relat to channelstuf
against a number of major us corpor includ mcafe inc and the cocacola
compani in 2006 the sec releas a press releas state that mcafe agre to settl
the proceed and pai a 50 million penalti after be charg by the sec with
account fraud httpwwwsecgovnewspress20063htm accord to the press
releas the account fraud charg includ alleg that mcafe us a varieti of
undisclos ploi dure the year 1998 throug h 2000 to aggress oversel it product
to distributor in amount that far exceed the public demand for the product the
sec alleg that as part of thi channelstuf scheme mcafe
improperli record the sale to distributor as revenu
offer it distributor lucr sale incent includ deep price discount and
rebat in an effort to persuad the distributor to continu to bui and stockpil
mcafe product
secretli paid distributor million of dollar to hold the excess inventori rather than
financi statement fraud financi transact
1316 2011 fraud examin manual
return it to mcafe for a refund and consequ reduct in mcafe revenu
us an undisclos whollyown subsidiari net tool inc to repurchas inventori
that mcafe had oversold to it distributor and
took action to conceal the fraud from investor by among other thing wrongli
record in it book the payment and discount that it offer to distributor and
improperli manipul reserv account to increas inadequ sale reserv and cover
the cost of the distributor payment
in 2005 the sec issu a press releas announc an enforc action against the
cocacola compani relat to it channelstuf practic in japan known as gallon
push httpwwwsecgovnewspress200558htm accord to the press releas
the sec found that from 1997 through 1999 cocacola fail to disclos certain endof
quarter sale practic us to meet earn expect specif cocacola wa
alleg by the sec to have offer extend credit to japanes bottler to induc them to
purchas quantiti of beverag concentr the bottler otherwis would not have
purchas until a follow period although cocacola account treatment for sale
made in connect with gallon push wa found to be without issu the sec did find
that cocacola failur to disclos the impact of gallon push on current and futur
earn as well as relat fals statement and omiss within a pertin form 8k
violat the antifraud and period report requir of the feder secur law
record expens in the wrong period
the time record of expens is often compromis due to pressur to meet budget
project and goal or due to lack of proper account control as the expens of
certain cost is push into period other than the on in which thei actual occur thei ar
not properli match against the incom that thei help produc for exampl revenu mai
be recogn on the sale of certain item but the cost of good and servic that went into
the item sold might intention not be record in the account system until the
subsequ period thi might make the sale revenu from the transact almost pure
profit inflat earn in the next period earn would be depress by a similar
amount
what red flag ar associ with time differ includ prematur revenu recognit
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1317
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to the period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
unusu increas in gross margin or gross margin in excess of industri peer
unusu growth in the dai sale in receiv ratio receivablesaverag daili sale
unusu declin in the dai purchas in account payabl ratio account
payableaverag daili purchas
improp asset valuat
under the lower of cost or market valu ru le where an asset cost exce it current
market valu as happen often with obsolet technolog the asset must be written down to
market valu with the except of certain secur asset valu ar gener not increas
to reflect current market valu it is often necessari to us estim in account for
exampl estim ar us in determin the residu valu and the us life of a
depreci asset the uncollect portion of account receiv or the excess or obsolet
portion of inventori whenev estim ar us there is an addit opportun for
fraud by manipul those estim
mani scheme ar us to inflat current asset at the expens of longterm asset the net
effect is seen in the current ratio the misclassif of longterm asset as current asset
can be of critic concern to lend institut that often requir the mainten of
certain financi ratio thi is of particular consequ when the loan coven ar on
unsecur or undersecur line of credit and other shortterm borrow sometim
these misclassif ar refer to as window dress
most improp asset valuat involv the fraudul overstat of inventori or
receiv other improp asset valuat includ manipul of the alloc of the
purchas price of an acquir busi in order to inflat futur earn misclassif of
fix and other asset or improp capit of inventori or startup cost
improp asset valuat usual take the form of on of the follow classif
inventori valuat
account receiv
busi combin
fix asset
financi statement fraud financi transact
1318 2011 fraud examin manual
inventori valuat
inventori should be record at the lower of cost or market valu thi mean that
inventori must be valu at it acquisit cost except when the cost is determin to be
higher than the current market valu in which case it should be written down to it current
valu or written off altogeth if it ha no valu fail to write down inventori result in
overst asset and the mismatch of cost of good sold with revenu other method
by which inventori can be improperli state includ manipul of the physic inventori
count inflat of the unit cost us to price out inventori and failur to reliev inventori
for the cost of good sold fictiti inventori scheme usual involv the creation of fake
document such as inventori count sheet and receiv report compani have even
program special comput report of inventori for auditor that incorrectli ad up
the line item valu so as to inflat the overal inventori balanc computerassist audit
techniqu can significantli help auditor to detect mani of these inventori fraud
techniqu
in some instanc friendli coconspir claim to be hold inventori for compani in
question other time compani fals report larg valu of inventori in transit perhap
in the middl of the pacif ocean know that the auditor will have a difficult time
observ it bill and hold item that have alreadi been record as sale might be
includ in the physic inventori count as might good own by third parti but held by
compani on consign or for storag compani have even made up pallet of
inventori with hollow center place brick in seal box instead of high valu product
and shuttl inventori overnight between locat be observ by auditor on differ
dai so as to doubl count the inventori final it is also common for compani to insert
phoni count sheet dure the inventori observ or chang the quantiti on the
count sheet
account receiv
account receiv ar subject to manipul in the same manner as sale and inventori
and in mani case the scheme ar conduct togeth the two most common scheme
involv account receiv ar fictiti receiv and failur to write off account
receiv as bad debt or failur to establish an adequ allow for bad debt
fictiti receiv commonli aris from fictiti revenu which were discuss earlier
account receiv should be report at net realiz valu that is the amount of the
receiv less the amount expect not to be collect
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1319
fictiti account receiv
fictiti account receiv ar common among compani with financi problem as
well as with manag who receiv a commiss base on sale the typic entri under
fictiti account receiv is to debit increas account receiv and credit increas
sale of cours these scheme ar more common around the end of the account period
sinc account receiv ar expect to be paid in cash within a reason time
fraudster commonli attempt to conceal fictiti account receiv by provid fals
confirm of balanc to auditor thei get the audit confirm becaus the mail
address thei provid for the phoni custom is typic either a mailbox under their
control a home address or the busi address of a coconspir such scheme can be
detect by us busi credit report public record or even the telephon book to
identifi signific custom with no physic exist or no appar busi need for
the product sold to them
failur to write down
compani ar requir to accru loss on uncollect receiv when the criteria in
financi account standard board statement no 5 account for conting ar met
compani struggl for profit and incom mai be tempt to omit the recognit of
such loss becaus of their neg impact on incom
busi combin
compani ar requir to alloc the purchas price thei have paid to acquir anoth
busi to the tangibl and intang asset of that busi ani excess of the purchas
price over the valu of the acquir asset is treat as goodwil current standard
govern goodwil account have decreas the incent for compani to minim the
amount alloc to goodwil that previous wa requir to be amort against futur
earn howev compani mai still be tempt to overalloc the purchas price to in
process research and develop asset in order to then write them off immedi or
thei mai establish excess reserv for variou expens at the time of acquisit
intend to quietli releas those excess reserv into earn at a futur date
fix asset
bogu fix asset can be creat by a varieti of method thei ar subject to manipul
through sever differ scheme some of the more common scheme ar book
fictiti asset misrepres asset valuat and capit nonasset cost
financi statement fraud financi transact
1320 2011 fraud examin manual
book fictiti asset
on of the easiest method of asset misrepresent is the record of fictiti asset
thi fals creation of asset affect account total on a compani balanc sheet the
correspond account commonli us is the owner equiti account becaus compani
asset ar often physic found in mani differ locat thi fraud can sometim be
easili overlook on of the most common fictiti asset scheme is to simpli creat
fictiti document in other instanc the equip is leas not own and thi fact is
not disclos dure the audit of fix asset bogu fix asset can sometim be detect
becaus the fix asset addit make no busi sens
misrepres the valu of fix asset
fix asset should be record at cost although asset mai appreci in valu thi
increas in valu should not be recogn on compani financi statement mani financi
statement fraud have involv the report of fix asset at market valu instead of the
lower acquisit cost or at even higher inflat valu with phoni valuat to support
them further compani mai fals inflat the valu of fix asset by fail to record
impair of longliv asset as requir by fasb asc 3503035 and of goodwil as
requir by fasb asc 3502035 misrepresentat ion of asset valu frequent goe hand
in hand with other scheme
exampl
in octob 2002 the sec file a civil enforc action against former enron cfo
andrew s fastow who also face crimin charg relat to an alleg selfenrich
scheme to defraud enron secur holder through the us of certain offbalancesheet
entiti on of the six transact in the sec complaint against andrew fastow
involv raptor i and avici accord to the complaint enron and the fastow
control partnership ljm2 engag in complex transact with an entiti call raptor
i raptor i wa us to manipul enron balanc sheet and incom statement and to
gener profit for ljm2 and fastow at enron expens in septemb 2000 fastow
and other us raptor i to effectu a fraudul hedg transact ion and thu avoid a
decreas in the valu of enron invest in the stock of a public compani call avici
system inc specif fastow and other backdat document to make it appear that
enron had lock in the valu of it invest in avici in august of 2000 when avici
stock wa trade at it all time high price
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1321
capit nonasset cost
exclud from the cost of a purchas asset ar interest and financ charg incur in the
purchas for exampl when a compani financ a capit equip purchas monthli
payment includ both princip liabil reduct and interest payment on initi
purchas onli the origin cost of the asset should be capit the subsequ interest
payment should be charg to interest expens and not to the asset without a reason for
intens review fraud of thi type can go uncheck
underst asset
in some case as with some governmentrel or regul compani it is advantag
to underst asset addit fund is often base on asset amount thi
understat can be done directli or through improp depreci
misclassifi asset
in order to meet budget requir and for variou other reason asset ar sometim
misclassifi into gener ledger account in which thei dont belong for exampl fix
asset mai be fraudul reclassifi as current asset the manipul can skew financi
ratio and help the compani compli with loan coven or other borrow requir
what red flag ar associ with improp asset valuat
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific declin in custom demand and increas busi failur in either the
industri or the overal economi
asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv
subject judgment or uncertainti that ar difficult to support
nonfinanci manag excess part icip in or preoccup with the
select of account principl or the determin of signific estim
unusu increas in gross margin or margin in excess of industri peer
unusu growth in the number of dai sale in receiv ratio
unusu growth in the number of dai purchas in inventori ratio
reduct in allow for bad debt excess inventori obsolet inventori etc
especi if relev ratio ar out of line with those of industri peer
unusu chang in the relationship between fix asset and depreci
ad to asset while competitor ar reduc capit ti up in asset
financi statement fraud financi transact
1322 2011 fraud examin manual
conceal liabil and expens
underst liabil and expens is on of the wai financi statement can be
manipul to make a compani appear more profit than it actual is becaus pretax
incom will increas by the full amount of the expens or liabil not record thi financi
statement fraud method can have a signific impact on report earn with rel
littl effort by the fraudster it is much easier to commit than falsifi sale transact
miss transact can also be harder for auditor to detect than improperli record on
sinc the miss transact leav no audit trail
there ar three common method for conceal liabil and expens
liabilityexpens omiss
capit expens
failur to disclos warranti cost and liabil
liabilityexpens omiss
the prefer and easiest method of conceal liabil or expens is to simpli fail to
record them multimilliondollar judgment ag ainst a compani from a recent court decis
might be conveni ignor vendor invoic might be thrown awai or stuf into
drawer rather than post into the account payabl system therebi increas report
earn by the full amount of the invoic in a retail environ debit memo might be
creat for chargeback to vendor supposedli to claim permit rebat or allow but
sometim sole to creat addit incom whether or not these item ar properli
record in a subsequ account period doe not chang the fraudul natur of the
current financi statement
often perpetr of liabil and expens omiss believ thei can conceal their fraud in
futur period thei frequent plan to compens for their omit liabil with vision
of other incom sourc such as profit from futur price increas
just as thei ar easi to conceal omit lia biliti ar probabl on of the most difficult
scheme to uncov a thorough review of all postfinancialstatementd transact
such as account payabl increas and decreas can aid in the discoveri of omit
liabil in financi statement as can a computer analysi of expens record
addition if the auditor request and wa grant unrestrict access to the client file
a physic search could turn up conceal invoic and unpost liabil probe
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1323
interview of account payabl and other personnel can reveal unrecord or delai item
too
exampl
in juli 2002 the sec file suit in the unit state di trict court for the southern
district of new york charg major cabl televis produc adelphia commun
corpor the compani or adelphia it founder john j riga hi three son
timothi j riga michael j riga and jame p riga and two senior execut at
adelphia jame r brown and michael c mulcahei in on of the most extens
financi fraud ever to take place at a public compani the sec charg that adelphia
at the direct of the individu defend 1 fraudul exclud over 23 billion in
liabil from it consolid financi statement by hide them in off balanc sheet
affili 2 falsifi oper statist and inflat adelphia earn to meet wall
street expect and 3 conceal rampant selfdeal by the riga famili
includ the undisclos us of corpor fu nd for riga famili stock purchas and the
acquisit of luxuri condominium in new york and elsewher
with respect to the conceal liabil the complaint alleg that between mid1999 and
the end of 2001 john j riga timothi j ri ga michael j riga jame p riga and
jame r brown with the assist of michael c mulcahei caus adelphia to
fraudul exclud from the compani a nnual and quarterli consolid financi
statement over 23 billion in bank debt by deliber shift those liabil onto the
book of adelphia off balanc sheet unconsolid affili failur to record thi debt
violat gaap requir and precipit a seri of misrepresent about those
liabil by adelphia and the defend includ the creation of 1 sham transact
back by fictiti document to give the fals appear that adelphia had actual
repaid debt when in truth it had simpli shi fted them to unconsoli date rigascontrol
entiti and 2 mislead financi statement by give the fals impress through the
us of footnot that liabil list in the compani financi includ all outstand
bank debt
in novemb 2002 in exchang for hi testimoni against the riga men jame brown
wa releas from prosecut by consent to an entri of a perman injunct against
him for feder secur law violat addition brown ha been perman bar
from becom an offic or director of a public corpor
financi statement fraud financi transact
1324 2011 fraud examin manual
in juli 2004 after a threemonth trial a feder juri convict john and timothi riga of
conspiraci secur fraud and bank fraud john riga receiv a 15year prison sentenc
and wa fine 2300 and timothi riga wa sentenc to 20 year in prison jame
riga wa never crimin charg by the court in novemb 2005 michael riga
plead guilti to a charg of make a fals entri in a financi record
in april 2005 the sec file perman injunct against john timothi michael
and jame riga as well as jame brown michael mulcahei and adelphia
commun corpor the defend were charg with violat antifraud
period report record keep ing and intern control provis of feder secur law
in addit the riga famili member were bar from ever hold offic or director
posit in a public compani
capit expens
capit expens is anoth wai to increas incom and asset becaus capit item
ar depreci or amort over a period of year rather than expens immedi if
expenditur ar capit as asset and not expens dure the current period incom
will be overst as the asset ar depreci incom in subsequ period will be
underst
exampl
in novemb 2002 the sec file an am end complaint against worldcom inc
broaden it charg to alleg that worldcom misl investor from at least as earli as
1999 through the first quarter of 2002 the complaint state that the compani had
acknowledg that dure that period worl dcom materi overst the incom it
report on it financi statement by approx imat 9 billion main ly us two method
first worldcom reduc it oper expens by improperli releas as a credit to
oper expens certain provis previous establish for line cost and for tax
second the compani improperli reduc it oper expens by recharacter certain
expens as capit asset much of the 9 billion relat to improp account for line
cost which were among worldcom major oper expens the sec complaint
alleg that in a scheme direct and approv by member of senior manag
worldcom conceal the true extent of it l in cost by improperli reduc provis
held against line cost and by transfer certain line cost to it capit asset
account worldcom fals portrai itself as a profit busi when it wa not and
conceal larg loss these improp er account practic were design to and did inflat
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1325
incom to correspond with estim by wall street analyst and to support the price of
worldcom stock
in march 2005 former worldcom ceo bernard ebber wa convict of on count of
conspiraci on count of secur fraud and seven count of fals regulatori file and wa
later sentenc to 25 year in prison he also agre to forfeit nearli all of hi person
asset to settl a civil suit file by aggriev worldcom investor
scott sullivan the former cfo under ebber and the architect behind the fraud
scheme pled guilti to fraud charg and agre to testifi against ebber due to hi
cooper dure the investig he wa sentenc to onli five year in prison he also
agre to forfeit the proce from the sale of hi 10 million home along with hi 401k
hold to settl the civil suit brought by sharehold
former worldcom control david f myer and former director of gener
account buford buddi yate jr pled gu ilti to crimin charg prosecut by the
us attornei offic for the southern district of new york myer receiv a sentenc
of on year and on dai in prison yate wa also sentenc to on year and on dai in
prison and order to pai a 5000 fine addition each man wa perman
enjoin from act as an offic or director of ani public compani and wa suspend from
practic befor the sec as an accountan t under rule 1022 of the commiss
rule of practic
the sec also brought civil action against former member of the worldcom gener
account depart betti l vinson cpa and troi m normand both were
perman enjoin from secur violat s vinson wa suspend from appear or
practic befor the sec as an account in addit she pled guilti to on count of
secur fraud and on count of conspiraci to commit secur fraud and wa sentenc to
five month in prison and five month of hous arrest norm and pled guilti to similar
charg and receiv three year of probat for hi role in the fraud
expens capit expenditur
just as capit expens is improp so is expens cost that should be capit
the organ mai want to minim it net incom due to tax consider or to
increas earn in futur period expens an item that should be depreci over a
period of time help to accomplish just thatnet incom is lower and therefor so ar
tax
financi statement fraud financi transact
1326 2011 fraud examin manual
return and allow and warranti
improp record of sale return and allow occur when a compani fail to properli
record or present the expens associ with sale return and custom allow
stem from custom dissatisfact it is inevit that a certain percentag of product
sold will for on reason or anoth be return when thi happen manag must
record the relat expens as a contrasal account which reduc the amount of net sale
present on the compani incom statement
likewis when a compani offer a warranti on product sale it must estim the amount
of warranti expens it reason expect to incur over the warranti period and accru a
liabil for that amount in warranti liabil fraud the warranti liabil is usual either
omit altogeth or substanti underst anoth similar area is the liabil result
from defect product product liabil
what red flag ar associ with conceal liabil and expens
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv
subject judgment or uncertainti that ar difficult to support
nonfinanci manag excess part icip in or preoccup with the
select of account principl or the determin of signific estim
unusu increas in gross margin or margin in excess of industri peer
allow for sale return warranti claim etc that ar shrink in percentag term
or ar otherwis out of line with industri peer
unusu reduct in the number of dai purchas in account payabl ratio
reduc account payabl while competitor ar stretch out payment to vendor
improp disclosur
account principl requir that financi statement includ all the inform necessari
to prevent a reason discern user of the financi statement from be misl the
note should includ narr disclosur support schedul and ani other inform
requir to avoid mislead potenti investor creditor or ani other user of the financi
statement
manag ha an oblig to disclos all signific inform appropri in the
financi statement and in manag discuss and analysi in addit the disclos
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1327
inform must not be mislead improp disclosur relat to financi statement
fraud usual involv the follow
liabil omiss
subsequ event
manag fraud
relatedparti transact
account chang
liabil omiss
typic omiss includ the failur to disclos loan coven or conting liabil
loan coven ar agreement in addit to or as part of a financ arrang that a
borrow ha promis to keep as long as the financ is in place the agreement can
contain variou type of coven includ certain financi ratio limit and restrict on
other major financ arrang conting liabil ar potenti oblig that will
materi onli if certain event occur in the futur a corpor guarante of person loan
taken out by an offic or a privat compani control by an offic is an exampl of a
conting liabil the compani potenti lia biliti if materi must be disclos
subsequ event
event occur or becom known after the close of the period mai have a signific
effect on the financi statement and should be disclos fraudster typic avoid
disclos court judgment and regulatori decis that undermin the report valu of
asset that indic unrecord liabil or that advers reflect upon manag
integr public record search can reveal thi inform
manag fraud
manag ha an oblig to disclos to the sharehold signific fraud commit
by offic execut and other in posit of trust withhold such inform from
auditor would like also involv ly to auditor an illeg act in itself
relatedparti transact
relatedparti transact occur when a compani doe busi with anoth entiti whose
manag or oper polici can be control or significantli influenc by the
compani or by some other parti in common there is noth inher wrong with
relatedparti transact as long as thei ar fulli disclos if the transact ar not
conduct on an armslength basi the compani mai suffer econom harm injur
financi statement fraud financi transact
1328 2011 fraud examin manual
stockhold the financi interest that a compani offici might have mai not be readili
appar for exampl common director of two compani that do busi with each
other ani corpor gener partner and the partnership with which it doe busi and
ani control sharehold of the corpor with which hesheit doe busi mai be
relatedparti famili relationship can also be consid relat parti such as all lineal
descend and ancestor without regard to financi interest relatedparti transact
ar sometim refer to as selfdeal while these transact ar sometim
conduct at arm length often thei ar not
exampl
in septemb 2002 the sec charg former top execut of tyco intern ltd
includ former ceo l denni kozlowski with violat the feder secur law by
fail to disclos to sharehold hundr of million of dollar of lowinterest and interestfre
loan thei took from the compani and in some case never repaid the sec
complaint which also charg former tyc o cfo mark h swartz and chief legal
offic mark a belnick alleg that the three former execut also sold share of tyco
stock valu at million of dollar while their selfdeal remain undisclos the
complaint alleg numer improp transact ion includ kozlowski us of 242
million of loan for impermiss and una uthor purpos includ fund an
extravag lifestyl with these undisclos loan kozlowski allegedli amass million of
dollar in fine art yacht and estat jewelri as well as a 31 million park avenu
apart and a palati estat in nantucket kozlowski and swartz allegedli engag in
undisclos nonarmslength real estat transact with tyco or it subsidiari and
receiv undisclos compens and perqui site includ forgiv of multimillion
dollar loan rentfre us of larg new york apart and us of corpor aircraft for
person purpos at littl or no cost
in juli 2004 belnick wa acquit of all the charg brought against him in a separ
trial kozlowski and swartz were each found gu ilti of 22 charg in clude grand larceni
falsifi busi record con piraci and secur fraud and were sentenc to eight and
onethird to 25 year in prison
account chang
in gener three type of account chang must be disclos to avoid mislead the user
of financi statement account principl estim and report entiti although the
requir treatment for each type of chang is differ thei ar all suscept to
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1329
manipul by a determin fraudster for exampl fraudster mai fail to properli
retroact restat financi statement for a chang in account principl if the chang
caus the compani financi statement to appear weaker likewis thei mai fail to
disclos signific chang in estim such as the us live and estim salvag valu
of depreci asset or the estim underli the determin of warranti or other
liabil thei mai even secretli chang the report entiti by ad entiti own
privat by manag or by exclud certain companyown unit in order to improv
report result
backdat stock option
as a supplement to salari compani frequent offer employe stock option which grant
the recipi the privileg to purchas a share of the compani stock at a futur date for a
specif price call the strike price a strike price is the valu of a share at a particular date
gener the strike price is set at the price of the underli stock on the dai the option is
grant therefor the option becom valuabl onli with futur increas in the stock price
in thi wai compani grant stock option as an incent for employe to boost compani
perform and thu rais the stock price the practic of backdat stock option
howev give the employe a chanc to profit by purchas stock at past low price
provid an immedi payoff backdat stock option occur when a compani alter the
date of the grant to a time when the stock wa trade at a lower price in the interest of
make the option instantli valuabl and further increas the employe gain if the stock
price continu to rise
exampl
on june 1 20x1 compani xyz grant it ceo a stock option that provid the
execut the right to purchas 100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 20x2 for the
strike price per it usual polici the strike price is set at the price of the compani stock on
the date of the option grant on june 1 2008 the grant date xyz stock wa trade at
40 per share therefor if the stock price increas to 45 per share by januari 1
20x2 the ceo could exercis the option and purchas the share for 40 per share then
sell them immedi on the market for 45 per share result in a gain of 5 per share
howev the compani ha recent experienc a dramat increas in it share price on
mai 24 20x1 the stock wa trade for 15 per share to provid the ceo with an
opportun to exploit thi increas in share price the compani choos to backdat the
stock option to make it appear that thei were grant on mai 24 20x1 becaus the
strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date the strike price is
financi statement fraud financi transact
1330 2011 fraud examin manual
effect chang to 15 per share as a result the ceo now ha the option to bui 100
share of xyz stock on januari 1 20x2 for 15 per share thu the ceo ha
immedi gain 25 per share the differ between the stock price on the actual grant
date of june 1 and the state grant date of mai 24 base sole on the manipul of
the grant date us
backdat stock option came to the attent of the us secur and exchang
commiss sec when academ research reveal a pattern of stock price descend
just prior to mani report date of option grant then ascend immedi afterward
backdat is not necessarili illeg but can be if not handl appropri in order to be
legal the practic must be explicitli report to sharehold and the govern failur to
do so mai constitut secur fraud
in august of 2002 certain provis laid out under the sarbanesoxlei act took effect
requir compani to report stock option grant within two busi dai after the grant
the rule greatli reduc the time compani had to choos a favor grant date
compani were previous allow week or month befor thei were requir to report
stock option grant consequ the appar pattern of backdat nearli disappear
around the time the rule were enact howev report of actual practic in stock option
and the record data remain inconsist in mani case becaus not all compani adher
to sarbanesoxlei addition the revel of the preval of backdat ha caus
concern that compani mai not have record and disclos the option grant on the
financi statement in an accur manner in respons to thi issu the public compani
account oversight board pcaob issu a practic alert to prepar auditor for the
possibl of financi misstat due to backdat of stock option to keep a tight
rope on the possibl of thi type of illeg activ auditor should assess the inform
obtain from the audit to determin if there is a need for further audit procedur
what red flag ar associ with improp disclosur
domin of manag by a singl person or small group in a nonownermanag
busi without compens control
ineffect board of director or audit committe oversight over the financi report
process and intern control
ineffect commun implement support or enforc of the entiti
valu or ethic standard by manag or the commun of inappropri
valu or ethic standard
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1331
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to a period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
signific relatedparti transact not in the ordinari cours of busi or with
relat entiti either not audit or audit by a differ firm
signific bank account or subsidiari or branch oper in taxhaven jurisdict
for which there appear to be no clear busi justif
overli complex organiz structur invo lving unusu legal entiti or manageri
line of author
known histori of violat of secur la ws or other law and regul or claim
against the entiti it senior manag or board member alleg fraud or violat
of law and regul
recur attempt by manag to justifi margin or inappropri account on
the basi of materi
formal or inform restrict on the auditor that inappropri limit access to peopl
or inform or limit the abil of the auditor to commun effect with the
board of director or audit committe
what red flag ar associ with financi statement fraud gener
red flag associ with particular financi statement fraud scheme have been discuss
abov there ar mani red flag associ with financi statement fraud gener an
extens list of such red flag can be found in an appendix to au section 316 consider
of fraud in a financi statement audit where thei ar call risk factor some red flag
indic increas vulner to financi statement fraud other indic a greater
likelihood that financi statement fraud ha occur
some of the more signific red flag list in au section 316 ar
domin of manag by a singl person or small group in a nonownermanag
busi without compens control
profit or trend level expect of invest analyst institut investor
signific creditor or other extern parti particularli expect that ar unduli
aggress or unrealist includ expect creat by manag in for exampl
overli optimist press releas or annual report messag
ineffect commun implement support or enforc of the entiti
financi statement fraud financi transact
1332 2011 fraud examin manual
valu or ethic standard by manag or the commun of inappropri
valu or ethic standard
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
rapid growth or unusu profit especi compar to that of other compani in
the same industri
signific unusu or highli complex transact especi those close to a period
end that pose difficult substanc over form question
signific relatedparti transact not in the ordinari cours of busi or with
relat entiti not audit or audit by anoth firm
recur attempt by manag to justifi margin or inappropri account on
the basi of materi
formal or inform restrict on the auditor that inappropri limit access to peopl
or inform or limit the abil of the auditor to commun effect with those
charg with govern
detect of fraudul financi statement scheme
to better understand basic account concept and to see how an analysi of account
record and procedur can reveal a fraud consid the follow exampl
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1333
exampl
jackson hardwar suppli is a mediums pl umb and electr wholesal distributor
on decemb 31 the balanc sheet and incom statement were as follow
jackson hardwar suppli
balanc sheet
as of decemb 31
asset liabil owner equiti
cash 2427000 liabil
account receiv 300000 account payabl 300000
inventori 300000 salari payabl 70000
suppli 11000 rent payabl 50000
prepaid insur 44000 defer tax payabl 438000
equip 440000 total liabil 858000
owner equiti
common stock 2000000
retain earn 664000
total owner equiti 2664000
total asset
3522000
total liabil
owner equiti
3522000
jackson hardwar suppli
incom statement
for the year end decemb 31
revenu
sale revenu 3470000
cost of good sold 2100000
gross profit from sale 1370000
rent revenu 10000
gross profit 1380000
gener and administr expens
insur expens 4000
salari expens 220000
suppli expens 14000
rental expens 40000
total gener and
administr expens
278000
net incom befor tax 1102000
incom tax 438000
net incom 664000
financi statement fraud financi transact
1334 2011 fraud examin manual
an anonym tip wa receiv that the paymast is steal cash from the compani
late he ha been seen drive a new bmw and ha taken expens vacat the
presid of the compani want to follow up on the tip although the paymast is a
longtim trust employe the presid ask the fraud examin to determin if the
paymast ha been steal although there ar sever wai to proce with the
investig the fraud examin with account knowledg decid to first compar thi
year total salari expens with last year balanc he theoriz that if the paymast is
dishonest he might be conceal the theft in the salari expens account past experi
ha taught the fraud examin to look in the most obviou place first
the examin note that the balanc of 220000 in the salari expens account thi year is
significantli larger than the 180000 balanc last year he ask the owner if there is an
increas in the number of employe and how larg acrosstheboard rais were thi year
he discov that the work forc ha not incr eas and all employe includ the owner
receiv 10 percent rais he recalcul thi year salari by increas last year
salari 10 percent and determin that the balanc in the salari ex pens account should be
approxim 198000 180000 x 110 198000 he now believ that excess
salari went to someon
the next step is to follow the overstat in salari expens backward from the incom
statement through the account and journal entri to the sourc documentsth payrol
check in thi case he find that there ar 12 check payabl to john doe an employe
who quit in januari of last year he compar the endors on john doe check with
those on the paymast check and notic di stinct similar in the signatur arm
with thi evid he interview the paymast who confess es that he ha stolen 22000
and conceal the theft by issu payrol check to a nonexist employe check that he
subsequ endors and cash
obvious thi exampl is rel simpl but most fraud scheme ar simpl especi
for an examin who understand conceal techniqu and account
other detect techniqu ar avail for deter mine if the paymast is steal these
includ run a comput list of all employe who do not elect insur coverag and
other payrol withhold withhold on fictiti employe creat addit
conceal problem for perpetr have someon els distribut the check and
check social secur number of all activ employe ani of these method might have
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1335
reveal the spuriou paycheck to john doe the approach show howev how an
understand of account can be invalu for detect fraud
financi statement analysi
compar financi statement provid inform for current and past account
period account express in whole dollar amount yield a limit amount of inform
the convers of these number into ratio or percentag allow the reader of the
statement to analyz them base on their relationship to each other in addit it allow
the reader to more readili compar current perform with past perform in fraud
detect and investig the determin of the reason for relationship and chang
in amount can be import these determin ar the red flag that point an examin
in the direct of possibl fraud if larg enough a fraudul misstat will affect the
financi statement in such a wai that relationship between the number becom
question mani scheme ar detect becaus the financi statement when analyz
close do not make sens financi statement analysi includ the follow
vertic analysi
horizont analysi
ratio analysi
percentag analysi horizont and vertic
there ar tradition two method of percentag analysi of financi statement vertic
analysi is a techniqu for analyz the relationship between the item on an incom
statement balanc sheet or statement of cash flow by express compon as
percentag thi method is often refer to as common size financi statement in
the vertic analysi of an incom statement net sale is assign 100 percent for a balanc
sheet total asset is assign 100 percent on the asset side and total liabil and equiti is
express as 100 percent all other item in each of the section ar express as a
percentag of these number
horizont analysi is a techniqu for analyz the percentag chang in individu financi
statement item from on period to the next the first period in the analysi is consid
the base period and the chang in the subsequ period ar comput as a percentag of
the base period if more than two period ar present each period chang ar comput
as a percentag of the preced period as is the case with vertic analysi thi techniqu
will not work for small immateri fraud
financi statement fraud financi transact
1336 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow is an exampl of financi statement that ar analyz by both horizont and
vertic analysi
vertic analysi discuss
vertic analysi is the express of the relationship or percentag of compon item to a
specif base item in the abov exampl vertic analysi of the incom statement includ
total sale as the base amount and all other item ar then analyz as a percentag of that
total vertic analysi emphas the relationship of statement item wi thin each account
period these relationship can be us with histor averag to determin statement
anomali
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1337
in the abov exampl we can observ that account payabl make up 29 percent of total
liabil in year on histor we mai find that thi account averag slightli over 25
percent of total liabil in year two account payabl as a percentag of total liabil
increas to 51 percent although thi increas mai be explain through a correl
with a rise in sale such a signific increas could also be the start point of a fraud
examin sourc document should be examin to determin the reason for the rise in
thi percentag with thi type of examin fraudul activ might be detect the
same type of chang can be seen as sell expens declin as a percentag of sale in year
two from 20 percent to 17 percent again thi chang mai be explain with higher
volum sale or anoth bona fide explan but close examin mai point a fraud
examin to uncov fictiti sale sinc there wa not a correspond increas in sell
expens
horizont analysi discuss
horizont statement analysi us percentag comparison from on account period to the
next the percentag chang is calcul by divid the amount of increas or decreas for
each item by the base period amount the result percentag ar then studi in detail it
is import to consid the amount of chang as well as the percentag in horizont
comparison a 5 percent chang in an account with a veri larg dollar amount mai actual
be much more of a chang than a 50 percent chang in an account with much less activ
in the abov exampl it is obviou that the 80 percent increas in sale ha a much greater
correspond increas in cost of good sold which rose 140 percent these account ar
often us to hide fraudul expens withdraw or other illeg transact
ratio analysi
ratio analysi is a mean of measur the relationship between two differ financi
statement amount the relationship and comparison ar the kei to the analysi mani
profession includ banker investor and busi owner as well as major invest
firm us thi method ratio analysi allow for intern evalu us financi statement
data tradition financi statement ratio ar compar to an entiti industri averag
the ratio and comparison can be veri us in detect red flag for a fraud examin
the financi ratio present a signific chang from on year to the next or over a period
of year it becom obviou that there mai a problem as in all other analysi specif
chang ar often explain by chang in the busi oper analys chang in
financi statement fraud financi transact
1338 2011 fraud examin manual
current asset
current liabil
cashsecuritiesreceiv
current liabil
specif ratio is detect the appropri sourc account should be research and
examin in detail to determin if fraud ha occur for instanc a signific decreas in
a compani current ratio mai point to an incr eas in current liabil or a reduct in
asset both of which could be us to cover fraud
in the analysi of financi statement each reader of the statement will determin which
portion ar most import like the statement analysi discuss previous the analysi of
ratio is limit by it inabl to detect fraud on a smaller immateri scale some of the
type of financi ratio comparison ar shown below
mani of the possibl ratio ar us in industryspecif situat but the nine comparison
mention below ar ratio that mai lead to discoveri of fraud the follow calcul
ar base on the exampl financi statement present earlier
common financi ratio
current ratio
the current ratiocurr asset to current
liabilitiesi probabl the most commonli us ratio in financi statement analysi thi
comparison measur a compani abil to meet present oblig from it liquid asset
the number of time that current asset exce current liabil ha long been a quick
measur of financi strength
in detect fraud thi ratio can be a prime indic of manipul of the account
involv embezzl will caus the ratio to decreas liabil conceal will caus a
more favor ratio
in the case exampl the drastic chang in the current ratio from year on 284 to year
two 170 should caus an examin to look at these account in more detail for instanc
a checktamp scheme will usual result in a decreas in the current asset cash which
will in turn decreas the ratio
quick ratio
the quick ratio often refer to as the acid test ratio
compar the most liquid asset to current liabil thi calcul divid the total of
cash secur and receiv by current liabil to yield a measur of a compani abil
to meet sudden cash requir the quick ratio is a conserv measur of liquid that
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1339
net sale on account
averag net receiv
365
receiv turnov
cost of good sold
averag inventori
is often us in turbul econom time to provid an analyst with a worstcas scenario of
a compani work capit situat
an examin will analyz the quick ratio for fraud indic in year on of the exampl
the compani balanc sheet reflect a quick ratio of 205 thi ratio drop to 100 in year
two in thi situat a closer review of account receiv show thei ar increas at an
unusu rate which could indic that fictiti account receiv have been ad to
inflat sale of more concern perhap is the increas in account payabl which might
requir at a minimum a closer review to determin why
receiv turnov
receiv turnov is defin as net sale on account
divid by averag net receiv it measur the number of time account receiv is
turn over dure the account period in other word it measur the time between on
account sale and collect of fund thi ratio is on that us both incom statement and
balanc sheet account in it analysi if the fraud includ fictiti sale thi bogu incom
will never be collect as a result the turnov of receiv will decreas
collect ratio
account receiv ag is measur by the
collect ratio it divid 365 dai by the receiv turnov ratio to arriv at the averag
number of dai to collect receiv in gener the lower the collect ratio the faster
receiv ar collect a fraud examin mai us thi ratio as a first step in detect
fictiti receiv or larceni and skim scheme normal thi ratio will stai fairli
consist from year to year but chang in bill polici or collect effort mai caus a
fluctuat the exampl show a favor reduct in the collect ratio from 2263 in
year on to 17033 in year two thi mean that the compani is collect it receiv
more quickli in year two than in year on
inventori turnov
the relationship between a compani cost of good
sold and averag inventori is shown through the inventori turnov ratio thi ratio
measur the number of time inventori is sold dure the period thi ratio is a good
determin of purchas product and sale effici in gener a higher inventori
turnov ratio is consid more favor for exampl if cost of good sold ha increas
due to theft of inventori end inventori ha declin but not through sale then thi
financi statement fraud financi transact
1340 2011 fraud examin manual
365
inventori turnov
total liabil
total equiti
net incom
net sale
ratio will be abnorm high in the case exampl inventori turnov increas in year two
signal the possibl that an embezzl is buri in the inventori account an
examin should investig the chang in the compon of the ratio to determin where
to look for possibl fraud
averag number of dai inventori is in stock
the averag number of dai inventori is in stock ratio is a
restat of the inventori turnov ratio express in dai thi rate is import for
sever reason an increas in the number of dai inventori stai in stock caus addit
expens includ storag cost risk of inventori obsolesc and market price
reduct as well as interest and other expens incur due to ty up fund in inventori
stock inconsist or signific varianc in thi ratio is a red flag for fraud investig
examin mai us thi ratio to examin inventori account for possibl larceni scheme
purchas and receiv inventori scheme can affect the ratio as well underst the
cost of good sold will result in an increas in the ratio signific chang in the inventori
turnov ratio ar good indic of possibl fraudul inventori activ
debt to equiti ratio
the debt to equiti ratio is comput by divid total
liabil by total equiti thi ratio is on that is heavili
consid by lend institut it provid a clear pictur of the rel risk assum by
the creditor and owner the higher the ratio the more difficult it will be for the owner to
rais capit by increas longterm debt debt to equiti requir ar often includ as
borrow coven in corpor lend agreement the exampl displai a veri
favor year on ratio of 089 year two howev show a ratio of 184 which indic
that debt is greatli increas in thi case the increas in the ratio correspond with the rise
in account payabl sudden chang in thi ratio mai signal an examin to look for fraud
profit margin
profit margin ratio is defin as net incom divid by
net sale thi ratio is often refer to as the effici ratio in that it reveal profit earn
per dollar of sale thi percentag of net incom to sale relat not onli the effect of gross
margin chang but also charg to sale and administr expens as fraud is
commit net incom will be artifici overst and the profit margin ratio will be
abnorm high fals expens and fraudul disburs will caus an increas in
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1341
net sale
averag asset
expens and a decreas in the profit margin ratio over time thi ratio should be
fairli consist
asset turnov
net sale divid by averag oper asset is the
calcul us to determin the asset turnov ratio thi ratio is us to determin the
effici with which asset resourc ar util the case exampl displai a greater us of
asset in year two than in year on
by perform an analysi of the financi statement the examin mai be direct toward
the direct evid to resolv an alleg of fraud after perform a financi statement
analysi the examin can select statist sampl in the target account and eventu
examin the sourc document if an irregular of overstat is suspect begin the
examin with the financi statement if howev an irregular of understat is
suspect begin the examin with a review of the sourc document thi rule of thumb
is especi effect in the area of omiss of liabil such as litig conting
liabil leas and some product warranti
tax return review
tax return ar good sourc of addit and compar inform on the oper
of the busi a complet review and comparison to the financi statement mai provid
inform unknown to the lender or disclos unexplain discrep again the lack of
properli prepar or time file tax return mai be a method of stall or not provid
the requir inform most perpetr of fraud ar reluct to continu the decept
and falsifi a tax return yearafteryear extens and file of the tax return on the last
possibl date could be a ploi to cover up financi statement and tax return differ
interview in fraudul financi statement case
for indepth interview techniqu pleas refer to the interview theori and
applic chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi statement fraud doe not occur in an isol environ peopl in organ
who have both motiv and opportun ar the prime candid to commit fraudul
misstat in the overwhelm major of situat two kei manag particip
activ in the fraud the chief execut offic and the chief financi offic other
financi statement fraud financi transact
1342 2011 fraud examin manual
becom involv larg out of necess those who ar not directli involv most often
ar not awar that anyth is wrong
investig of financi statement fraud ar uniqu in that thei almost alwai involv
interview the execut manag of the organ to detect or deter financi
statement fraud it is absolut necessari that top manag be interview by a
compet and experienc fraud examin who possess the abil to solicit honest
answer to tough but vital question about whether anyon ha tamper with the book
interview techniqu
situat in which account ar tempt to misstat financi statement most often
involv pressur connect with financi perform the follow is a fictiti
convers between upper manag of a corpor the exampl show how the
pressur to commit financi statement fraud can greatli influenc account personnel
cfo to ceo boss it look like we will not have a good year financi we told
the sharehold or bank that our earn would be 4 a share and it look like well
be veri lucki to even make 3
ceo well what ar we go to do about it if we miss the earn project or
dont get the loan our goos will be cook well both lose our job we must get those
earn up to where thei should be
cfo what do you mean
ceo what i mean is that it is your job to bring in the number your go to have
to find a wai to get them up im sure we can probabl make up the differ next year
but for now you get our earningsassetsequ up howev you have to all financi
statement ar essenti estim anyhow so you figur out how to estim the number
more in our favor i dont know how to do it and i dont want you to tell me but get it
done
the cfo face a dilemma cook the book or lose hi job the action of the cfo ar veri
hard to predict if he step over the edg chanc ar he will need to enlist the aid of
account and cleric personnel to carri out the detail even if these employe do not
know what thei ar actual do for exampl the cfo might tell the chief account to
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1343
book certain receiv and incom which would produc the need effectpump up
the equiti such a scheme might onli be appar to the real insid
in order to detect financi statement fraud through interview manag and kei
support staff must be interview fraud examin and auditor collect refer to as
examin must consid mani import ant issu when conduct interview on
import issu examin should keep in mind when conduct interview is that there is
gener no liabil in ask question in which thei have a legitim interest no matter
how insult the question might be to the respond examin therefor have the
legal right to be fearless in ask question as long as the question ar ask privat and
under reason circumst thi legal right doesnt extend to accusationsonli to
question ar you still cook the book is an accus wherea ar you cook
the book is a question it is import to know the differ and to frame question
accordingli
examin should also be sure to interview onli on person at a time group of peopl
should not be interview togeth becaus member tend to influenc each other the
interview should alwai be conduct under privat condit which permit the
respond to answer candidli
it is import that examin aim to be nonthreaten in their interview approach the
less threaten the interview appear the less reluct the respond will be to answer
question an interview should not be judgment or show surpris or disgust such action
can inhibit the flow of inform
examin should warm up respond thoroughli befor ask sensit question it is
best to obtain all of the procedur inform and inform pertain to intern
control prior to discuss fraud fraud should usual be the last thing cover in an
interview
in order to reduc the possibl of offend respond examin can explain the natur
of their interest befor ask sensit question for exampl an examin can sai as you
know as an auditor i am requir to activ look for fraud thi mean i must ask you some direct
question about the subject do you understand then after obtain a posit respons the
examin can proce to ask question about fraud it is best to ask the least difficult
question first
financi statement fraud financi transact
1344 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth approach examin can take to make tough interview question more palat is
to phrase them hypothet especi dure the begin of the interview for exampl
rather than ask a chief financi offic have you commit fraud an examin can
sai to the execut suppos someon in the po sition of chief financi offic decid to
pump up the financi how would he do it the latter question is far more like to illicit
specif inform than the former later in the interview the execut should be ask
specif if he ha commit the fraud the examin can sai someth along the line of
my profession respons requir me to ask you on particularli sensit direct
question have you commit fraud or other illeg act against the compani the vast
major of respond will answer no to such a question without hesit whether
thei have or not howev simpli ask the question place the examin in a much more
favor posit if attack profession for not detect a fraud
the interview
fraud examin and auditor should ask question design to elicit the most specif
inform possibl in a profession manner
the chief execut offic
gener the ceo should be interview first in ani proactiv or reactiv fraud situat
there ar sever good reason for thi approach first of all the auditor or fraud examin
must have a thorough understand with manag as to what hi respons in thi
area ar second it is unwis to conduct sensit inquiri within ani organ without
first advis the ceo if he learn from some other sourc that you ar make discreet
fraudrel inquiri without tell him he is more like to misunderstand your object
and take the inquiri as a person affront third if there is ani signific cook of the
book the ceo is almost alwai involv the fraudrel question you should ask in
connect with a regular audit should includ at a minimum the follow note how the
question ar for set up purpos
1 mr ceo as you know we ar requir to assess the risk that materi fraud exist in everi compani
not just your thi is sort of a sensit area for everyon but our profession respons dictat
that we address thi area do you understand wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
2 do you have ani reason to believ that materi fraud is be commit at ani level within the
organ
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1345
3 mr ceo on trend in fraud is that small fraud ar commit by employe with littl author
which mean that the largest on ar usual commit with the knowledg of upper manag do
you understand that wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
4 becaus of that we ar requir to at least look at the possibl that all ceo includ you might
commit signific fraud against custom investor or sharehold do you understand our situat
wait for an affirm respons
5 so dure thi audit examin we need to ask direct question ab out thi subject to you and your
staff as a matter of fact we will at least discuss the possibl of fraud with everi employe we talk with
in connect with thi audit exa minat do you have ani problem with that wait for a neg
respons if the ceo protest satisfi hi object if he cannot be satisfi assess the risk of whether
the ceo is attempt to obstruct the audit or examin
6 first let look at your cfo can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the
compani by commit fraud
7 ha the cfo ever ask you to approv ani financi transact you thought might be improp or
illeg
8 do you know whether the cfo ha ani outsid busi interest that might conflict with hi duti
here
9 doe the cfo emploi ani friend or rel in the compani look for possibl conflict or sweetheart
deal
10 what inform do you have about the cfo lifestyl look for expens home car toi and
habit
11 what is your gener impress of how the cfo get along with hi staff look for abus of
author etc that would motiv employe di rectli below the cfo to particip in fraud
12 how do you think fraud in your compani compar with other in the same industri
13 of cours mr ceo i must ask you mani of the same question about yourself is there ani reason
that anyon below you might claim you ar commit fraud against the compani
financi statement fraud financi transact
1346 2011 fraud examin manual
14 i must also ask you some person financi quest ion do you have ani problem with thi wait for
neg respons
15 pleas give me a current estim of your person asset s liabil incom and expens list what
percentag of your net worth is ti directli to thi compani look for highli leverag individu whose
compani hold ar a signific portion of their net worth
16 ar you current experienc ani person financi problem look for lawsuit lien judgment or
other indic
17 do you have friend or rel work for thi compani look for conflict of interest
18 do you have friend or rel work for major supplier or vendor to thi compani look for
conflict of interest
19 do you own ani portion of a compani that doe busi with thi organ look for conflict of
interest
20 hypothet if you want to pump up your compani profit what would be the easiest wai to do it
21 as i said we will be requir to ask mani question of your staff is there ani reason why someon who
work for you would sai you ar at risk to commit signific fraud against the compani or it
sharehold
22 mr ceo thi is the last question and it should be obviou why i have to ask it have you commit
fraud or other illeg act against the compani do not apolog for ask the question it your job
the ceo top staff
ceo of corpor larg and small ar busi individu becaus thei tend to be big
pictur peopl by natur thei reli heavili on their staffsprincip their person
assistantsto take care of detail but person assist do not usual becom close ti
to the boss without a demonstr histori of loyalti and discret in short if you make
the bosss assist mad your fraudrel question ar go to be interpret in the worst
possibl light therebi make your job much more difficult
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1347
so the kei to interview the ceo top sta ff is to approach the interview process
correctli from the outset thi mean lai a great deal of groundwork befor ask
sensit question start with procedur matter or some other nonsensit topic and ask
the fraudrel question toward the end of your convers
1 mr assist part of my job as an auditor fraud examin is to assess the risk that the compani
book ar not materi correct as a result of fraud by employe or manag i have alreadi talk
about these issu with your boss he understand their import and he is awar that as part of the
audit i will be talk to everyon about the subject to some extent do you have ani problem with thi
wait for neg respons
2 do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in gener icebreak
3 how do you think thi compani stack up to other in term of honesti of it employe and manag
4 have you ever heard rumor in the compani that someon is commit fraud especi someon high
up in the organ
5 is the compani in ani kind of financi troubl that would motiv manag to misstat the
compani profit
6 do you think your cowork ar essenti honest
7 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do someth you felt wa not legal or ethic
8 how would you handl such a situat solic it inform on fraud report program
9 if someon in a posit of author in the compani want to commit fraud what would be the easiest
wai to do it
10 as your auditor mai i ask you to report ani instanc in the futur of anyon ask you to do anyth
to the book and record that you feel is not right solicit futur cooper
financi statement fraud financi transact
1348 2011 fraud examin manual
the chief financi offic
in the vast major of case the cfo is an integr part of ani financi statement fraud as
illustr previous as a result the interview with the cfo should concentr not onli
on possibl motiv to commit fraud but also on the opportun to do so sinc most
cfo ar account thei should more readili understand your fraudrel mission thi
can be good or bad good if the cfo is hone st and bad if he isnt among all financi
personnel the cfo is in the best posit to know how to cook the book and keep it from
be uncov as if that werent enough mani cfo ar hire directli from the firm
that audit the compani is there ani other person more like to be at the center of the
fraud
1 mr cfo you now know that audit standard requir us to activ assess the risk that materi fraud
could be affect the financi statement we have ta lked with the ceo and he is fulli awar that we
will be ask most everyon we speak with about the possibl of fraud or irregular you
understand thi dont you wait for affirm respons
2 of the account on the compani book which do you suspect might be the most vulner to
manipul and why
3 what kind of histori doe the compani have with fraud in gener includ defalc and employe
theft look for sign of a weak corpor cultur
4 we know that fraud usual exist to some extenteven if it is smallin most compani how do you
think your compani compar to other
5 what is your overal impress of the compani ethic and corpor cultur
6 dure our assess of risk of fraud in your compani ar there ani specif ar ea youd like to discuss
with us
7 is there ani reason that anyon in the compani might sai that manag had a motiv to misstat the
financi
8 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do anyth with the book that you thought wa
question uneth or illeg
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1349
9 ar you involv in the person financ of the ceo if so is there anyth about them that might
make you think he is under person financi pressur
10 do either the ceo lifestyl or habit give you ani reason to think he mai be live beyond hi mean
11 ha anyon in a posit of author ever ask that you withhold in format from the auditor alter
document or make fictiti en tri in the book and record
12 is there anyth about your own background or financ that would caus someon to suspect that you
had a motiv for commit fraud
13 becaus of your import as cf o i must ask you on final question have you yourself commit
fraud or illeg act against thi compani rememberdont apolog
the account staff
if a financi statement fraud ha been order by the cfo he will either do the actual dirti
work himself or get hi staff to do it in some case the staff will understand the big pictur
but in most situat the employe is told onli what he need to know it is uncommon for
a cfo to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cook the book
as a result the examin gener must complet hi audit work befor begin the
interview of the account staff thi will allow specif transact to be discuss with
the peopl who actual enter them into the compani record for exampl all thorough
audit will examin the major journal entri frequent these journal entri will be order
by the cfo but actual enter by a staff member there would gener be no record of
the cfo request the entri so thi fact must be establish through interview
interview of the account staff will allow suffici examin of procedur and
control over asset after these question ar answer you can gener pursu the line of
inquiri suggest abov for the ceo assist
it should be note that there ar similar and differ in the question ask of the
ceo the cfo and their staff in the case of the ceo and the cfo both were specif
ask if thei had commit fraud against the compani albeit in a nice wai the staffer
were not ask that specif question
financi statement fraud financi transact
1350 2011 fraud examin manual
the reason is thi signific financi statement fraud as we have state gener
origin with on or both of these two execut staffer have less motiv to engag
in financi statement fraud and ar therefor at less risk to do so thei ar also less like
to have the financi author to enter transact into the book without higher approv
so absent ani specif inform to the contrari ask the employe point blank if thei
have commit fraud is less like to produc inform and more like to offend them
but with the cfo and the ceo ask the direct question will add measur to the
prevent of fraud there ar few defens to not ask the question other than the
specter of embarrass the execut you ar audit that will of cours sound pretti
weak in a court of law where you ar fight for your profession life
prevent of financi statement fraud
prevent and deterr of financi statement fraud consist of those action taken to
discourag the perpetr of fraud and limit the exposur if fraud doe occur
intern auditor
intern auditor ar respons for help to deter fraud by examin and evalu the
adequaci and the effect of control commensur with the extent of the potenti
exposur in the variou segment of an entiti oper the intern audit standard
state that the princip mechan for deter fraud is intern control primari
respons for establish and maintain intern control rest with manag the
treadwai commiss address thi issu by recommend that intern audit depart
or staff have not onli the support of top manag but also the necessari resourc
avail to carri out their mission the intern auditor respons is to aid manag
in the deterr of fraud by evalu the adequaci and effect of the compani
intern control system as well as the compani potenti exposur to fraud with particular
consider given to the five element of intern control laid out by coso
manag
it is manag respo nsibil to set the ethic tone of the organ as with other
type of occup fraud and abus reduc the three factor that contribut to fraud
will greatli help in the prevent of financi statement fraud reduc exist pressur
to commit fraud remov potenti opportun to commit fraud and reliev possibl
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1351
ration for commit fraud will greatli aid in the prevent of financi statement
fraud
reduc the situat pressur that encourag financi statement fraud
avoid set unachiev financi goal
elimin extern pressur that might tempt account personnel to prepar
fraudul financi statement
remov oper obstacl that block effect financi perform such as
work capit restraint excess product volum or inventori restraint
establish clear and uniform account procedur that do not contain except
claus
reduc the opportun to commit fraud
maintain accur and complet intern account record
carefulli monitor the busi transact and interperson relationship of supplier
buyer purchas agent sale repres and other who interfac in the
transact between financi unit
establish a physic secur system to secur compani asset includ finish good
cash capit equip tool and other valuabl item
divid import function between employe separ total control of on area
maintain accur personnel record includ background check where permit by
law on new employe
encourag strong supervisori and leadership relationship within group to ensur
enforc of account procedur
reduc the ration of fraud strengthen employe person integr
manag should set an exampl by promot ing honesti in the account area it is
import that manag practic what it preach dishonest act by manag
even if thei ar direct at someon outsid of the organ creat a dishonest
environ that can spread to other busi activ and other employe both
intern and extern
honest and dishonest behavior should be defin in compani polici organiz
account polici should clear up ani grai area in account procedur
the consequ of violat the rule includ the punish of violat should
be clear
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1401
