2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Fictitious Revenues


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Fictitious Revenues  
Fictitious or fabricated revenues involve the recording of sales of goods or services that did 
not occur. Fictitious sales most often involve fake or phantom customers, but can also 
involve legitimate customers. For example, a fictitious invoice can be prepared (but not 
mailed) for a legitimate customer although the goods are not delivered or the services are not 
rendered. At the beginning of the next accounting period, the sale might be reversed to help 
conceal the fraud, but this may lead to a revenue shortfall in the new period, creating the 
need for more fictitious sales. Another method is to use legitimate customers and artificially 
inflate or alter invoices reflecting higher amounts or quantities than are actually sold.  
 
Generally speaking, revenue is recognized when it is (1) realized or realizable, and (2) earned. 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) 
Topic 13, Revenue Recognition (now codified in FASB ASC 605-10-S99), to provide additional 
guidance on revenue recognition criteria and to rein in some of the inappropriate practices 
that had been observed. FASB ASC 605-10-S99 states that revenue is typically considered 
realized or realizable, and earned when all of the following criteria are met: 
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; 
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; 
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable; and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured. 
 
EXAMPLE OF FICTITIOUS REVENUES 
In one case, a foreign subsidiary of a U.S. company recorded several large fictitious sales to 
a series of companies. They invoiced the sa les but did not collect any of the accounts 
receivable, which became severely past due. The manager of the foreign subsidiary arranged 
for false confirmations of  the accounts receivable for audit purposes and even hired actors to 
pretend to be the customers during a visit fr om U.S. management. Background checks on 
the customers would have revealed that some of the companies were fictitious while others 
either were undisclosed related parties or operated in industries that would have no need for 
the goods supposedly supplied. An investigation  revealed that the manager of the foreign 
subsidiary directed the scheme to record fictitious revenues in order to meet unrealistic 
revenue goals set by U.S. management.  
 
In some cases, companies go to great lengths to conceal fictitious sales. A sample journal 
entry from such a case is detailed below. A fictional entry is made to record a purported 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.311 
purchase of fixed assets. This entry debits fixed assets for the amount of the alleged 
purchase and the credit is to cash for the payment: 
 
Date Description Ref. Debit Credit 
12/01/X1 Fixed Assets 104 350,000  
 Cash 101  350,000 
 
A fictitious sales entry is then made for the same amount as the false purchase, debiting 
accounts receivable and crediting the sales account. The cash outflow that supposedly paid 
for the fixed assets is “returned” as payment on the receivable account, though in practice 
the cash might never have moved if the fraudsters didn’t bother to falsify that extra 
documentary support. 
 
Date Description Ref. Debit Credit 
12/01/X1 Accounts Rec 120 350,000  
 Sales 400  350,000 
12/15/X1 Cash 101 350,000  
 Accounts Rec 120  350,000 
 
The result of this completely fabricated sequence of events is an increase in both fixed assets 
and revenue. The debit could alternatively have been directed to other accounts, such as 
inventory or accounts payable, or simply left in accounts receivable if the fraud were 
committed close to the year’s end and the receivable could be left outstanding without 
attracting undue attention. 
 



:


fictiti revenu
fictiti or fabric revenu involv the record of sale of good or servic that did
not occur fictiti sale most often involv fake or phantom custom but can also
involv legitim custom for exampl a fictiti invoic can be prepar but not
mail for a legitim custom although the good ar not deliv or the servic ar not
render at the begin of the next account period the sale might be revers to help
conceal the fraud but thi mai lead to a revenu shortfal in the new period creat the
need for more fictiti sale anoth method is to us legitim custom and artifici
inflat or alter invoic reflect higher amount or quantiti than ar actual sold
gener speak revenu is recogn when it is 1 realiz or realiz and 2 earn
the secur and exchang commiss sec issu staff account bulletin sab
topic 13 revenu recognit now codifi in fasb asc 60510s99 to provid addit
guidanc on revenu recognit criteria and to rein in some of the inappropri practic
that had been observ fasb asc 60510s99 state that revenu is typic consid
realiz or realiz and earn when all of the follow criteria ar met
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
exampl of fictiti revenu
in on case a foreign subsidiari of a us compani record sever larg fictiti sale to
a seri of compani thei invoic the sa le but did not collect ani of the account
receiv which becam sever past due the manag of the foreign subsidiari arrang
for fals confirm of the account receiv for audit purpos and even hire actor to
pretend to be the custom dure a visit fr om us manag background check on
the custom would have reveal that some of the compani were fictiti while other
either were undisclos relat parti or oper in industri that would have no need for
the good supposedli suppli an investig reveal that the manag of the foreign
subsidiari direct the scheme to record fictiti revenu in order to meet unrealist
revenu goal set by us manag
in some case compani go to great length to conceal fictiti sale a sampl journal
entri from such a case is detail below a fiction entri is made to record a purport
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1311
purchas of fix asset thi entri debit fix asset for the amount of the alleg
purchas and the credit is to cash for the payment
date descript ref debit credit
1201x1 fix asset 104 350000
cash 101 350000
a fictiti sale entri is then made for the same amount as the fals purchas debit
account receiv and credit the sale account the cash outflow that supposedli paid
for the fix asset is return as payment on the receiv account though in practic
the cash might never have move if the fraudster didnt bother to falsifi that extra
documentari support
date descript ref debit credit
1201x1 account rec 120 350000
sale 400 350000
1215x1 cash 101 350000
account rec 120 350000
the result of thi complet fabric sequenc of event is an increas in both fix asset
and revenu the debit could altern have been direct to other account such as
inventori or account payabl or simpli left in account receiv if the fraud were
commit close to the year end and the receiv could be left outstand without
attract undu attent
