2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Premature Revenue Recognition


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Premature Revenue Recognition)  
Financial statement fraud might also involve timing differences, that is, the recording of 
revenues or expenses in improper periods. This can be done to shift revenues or expenses 
between one period and the next, increasing or decreasing earnings as desired. 
 
Premature Revenue Recognition 
As previously mentioned, revenue should be recognized in the accounting records when the 
following four criteria as set out in FASB ASC 605-10-S99 have been satisfied: 
• Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists; 
• Delivery has occurred or services have been rendered; 
• The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable; and 
• Collectibility is reasonably assured. 
 
One or more of these criteria is typically  not met when managers recognize revenues 
prematurely. Examples of common problems with premature revenue recognition are set 
out below. 
 
PERSUASIVE EVIDENCE OF AN ARRANGEMENT DOES NOT EXIST 
• No written or verbal agreement exists. 
• A verbal agreement exists but a written agreement is customary. 
• A written order exists but is conditional upon sale to end users (such as a consignment 
sale). 
• A written order exists but contains a right of return. 
• A written order exists but a side letter alters the terms in ways that eliminate the required 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.313 
elements for an agreement. 
• The transaction is with a related party, which has not been disclosed. 
 
DELIVERY HAS NOT OCCURRED OR SERVICES HAVE NOT BEEN RENDERED 
• Shipment has not been made and the criteria for recognizing revenue on “bill-and-hold” 
transactions set out in FASB ASC 605-10-S99 have not been met. 
• Shipment has been made not to the customer but to the seller’s agent, an installer, or to a 
public warehouse. 
• Some, but not all, of the components required for operation were shipped. 
• Items of the wrong specification were shipped. 
• Delivery is not complete until installation, customer testing, and customer acceptance 
has occurred. 
• Services have not been provided at all. 
• Services are being performed over an extended period and only a portion of the service 
revenues should have been recognized in the current period. 
• The mix of goods and services in a contract has been misstated in order to improperly 
accelerate revenue recognition. 
 
THE SELLER’S PRICE TO THE BUYER IS NOT FIXED OR DETERMINABLE 
• The price is contingent upon some future events. 
• A service or membership fee is subject to unpredictable cancellation during the contract 
period. 
• The transaction includes an option to exchange the product for others. 
• Payment terms are extended for a substantial period and additional discounts or 
upgrades may be required to induce continued use and payment instead of switching to 
alternative products. 
 
COLLECTIBILITY IS NOT REASONABLY ASSURED 
• Collection is contingent upon a future event, such as resale of the product, receipt of 
additional funding, or litigation. 
• The customer does not have the ability to pay; for example, it is financially troubled, it 
has purchased far more than it can afford, or it is a shell company with minimal assets. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC, Inc. sells products that require engineering and adapting work before they are 
acceptable to customers. However, the company records sales revenue before completing the 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.314                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
engineering, testing, evaluation, and customer acceptance stages of production. In some cases, 
sales do not take place for weeks or months.  In other cases, the sales are specifically 
contingent upon the customer’s trial and acceptance of the product.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Another company is engaged in the design, development, manufacture, marketing, and 
servicing of computer peripheral subsystems. The company recognized revenue prior to a time 
when collection of the sales price was reasonably assured and at  a time prior to completion 
of the underlying sales transaction. 
 
It was the company’s policy to recognize revenue  when the products we re shipped. However, 
the sales were not complete as of the time of shipment because customers were not obligated 
to pay for the equipment until it had been installed; the company had substantial 
obligations to the customers for installation  and adjustments; and there remained major 
uncertainties concerning the customers’ true willingness to complete the transaction because 
of the volatile nature of the high-tech product. 
 



:


prematur revenu recognit
financi statement fraud might also involv time differ that is the record of
revenu or expens in improp period thi can be done to shift revenu or expens
between on period and the next increas or decreas earn as desir
prematur revenu recognit
as previous mention revenu should be recogn in the account record when the
follow four criteria as set out in fasb asc 60510s99 have been satisfi
persuas evid of an arrang exist
deliveri ha occur or servic have been render
the seller price to the buyer is fix or determin and
collect is reason assur
on or more of these criteria is typic not met when manag recogn revenu
prematur exampl of common problem with prematur revenu recognit ar set
out below
persuas evid of an arrang doe not exist
no written or verbal agreement exist
a verbal agreement exist but a written agreement is customari
a written order exist but is condit upon sale to end user such as a consign
sale
a written order exist but contain a right of return
a written order exist but a side letter alter the term in wai that elimin the requir
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1313
element for an agreement
the transact is with a relat parti which ha not been disclos
deliveri ha not occur or servic have not been render
shipment ha not been made and the criteria for recogn revenu on billandhold
transact set out in fasb asc 60510s99 have not been met
shipment ha been made not to the custom but to the seller agent an instal or to a
public warehous
some but not all of the compon requir for oper were ship
item of the wrong specif were ship
deliveri is not complet until instal custom test and custom accept
ha occur
servic have not been provid at all
servic ar be perform over an extend period and onli a portion of the servic
revenu should have been recogn in the current period
the mix of good and servic in a contract ha been misstat in order to improperli
acceler revenu recognit
the seller price to the buyer is not fix or determin
the price is conting upon some futur event
a servic or membership fee is subject to unpredict cancel dure the contract
period
the transact includ an option to exchang the product for other
payment term ar extend for a substanti period and addit discount or
upgrad mai be requir to induc continu us and payment instead of switch to
altern product
collect is not reason assur
collect is conting upon a futur event such as resal of the product receipt of
addit fund or litig
the custom doe not have the abil to pai for exampl it is financi troubl it
ha purchas far more than it can afford or it is a shell compani with minim asset
exampl
abc inc sell product that requir engin and adapt work befor thei ar
accept to custom howev the compani record sale revenu befor complet the
financi statement fraud financi transact
1314 2011 fraud examin manual
engin test evalu and custom accept stage of product in some case
sale do not take place for week or month in other case the sale ar specif
conting upon the custom trial and accept of the product
exampl
anoth compani is engag in the design develop manufactur market and
servic of comput peripher subsystem the compani recogn revenu prior to a time
when collect of the sale price wa reason assur and at a time prior to complet
of the underli sale transact
it wa the compani polici to recogn revenu when the product we re ship howev
the sale were not complet as of the time of shipment becaus custom were not oblig
to pai for the equip until it had been instal the compani had substanti
oblig to the custom for instal and adjust and there remain major
uncertainti concern the custom true willing to complet the transact becaus
of the volatil natur of the hightech product
