2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Premature Revenue Recognition/COLLECTIBILITY IS NOT REASONABLY ASSURED


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


COLLECTIBILITY IS NOT REASONABLY ASSURED 
• Collection is contingent upon a future event, such as resale of the product, receipt of 
additional funding, or litigation. 
• The customer does not have the ability to pay; for example, it is financially troubled, it 
has purchased far more than it can afford, or it is a shell company with minimal assets. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC, Inc. sells products that require engineering and adapting work before they are 
acceptable to customers. However, the company records sales revenue before completing the 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.314                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
engineering, testing, evaluation, and customer acceptance stages of production. In some cases, 
sales do not take place for weeks or months.  In other cases, the sales are specifically 
contingent upon the customer’s trial and acceptance of the product.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Another company is engaged in the design, development, manufacture, marketing, and 
servicing of computer peripheral subsystems. The company recognized revenue prior to a time 
when collection of the sales price was reasonably assured and at  a time prior to completion 
of the underlying sales transaction. 
 
It was the company’s policy to recognize revenue  when the products we re shipped. However, 
the sales were not complete as of the time of shipment because customers were not obligated 
to pay for the equipment until it had been installed; the company had substantial 
obligations to the customers for installation  and adjustments; and there remained major 
uncertainties concerning the customers’ true willingness to complete the transaction because 
of the volatile nature of the high-tech product. 
 



:


collect is not reason assur
collect is conting upon a futur event such as resal of the product receipt of
addit fund or litig
the custom doe not have the abil to pai for exampl it is financi troubl it
ha purchas far more than it can afford or it is a shell compani with minim asset
exampl
abc inc sell product that requir engin and adapt work befor thei ar
accept to custom howev the compani record sale revenu befor complet the
financi statement fraud financi transact
1314 2011 fraud examin manual
engin test evalu and custom accept stage of product in some case
sale do not take place for week or month in other case the sale ar specif
conting upon the custom trial and accept of the product
exampl
anoth compani is engag in the design develop manufactur market and
servic of comput peripher subsystem the compani recogn revenu prior to a time
when collect of the sale price wa reason assur and at a time prior to complet
of the underli sale transact
it wa the compani polici to recogn revenu when the product we re ship howev
the sale were not complet as of the time of shipment becaus custom were not oblig
to pai for the equip until it had been instal the compani had substanti
oblig to the custom for instal and adjust and there remain major
uncertainti concern the custom true willing to complet the transact becaus
of the volatil natur of the hightech product
