2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Fixed Assets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Fixed Assets  
Bogus fixed assets can be created by a variety of methods. They are subject to manipulation 
through several different schemes. Some of the more common schemes are booking 
fictitious assets, misrepresenting asset valuation, and capitalizing non-asset costs. 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.320                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BOOKING FICTITIOUS ASSETS 
One of the easiest methods of asset misrepresentation is the recording of fictitious assets. 
This false creation of assets affects account totals on a company’s balance sheet. The 
corresponding account commonly used is the owners’ equity account. Because company 
assets are often physically found in many different locations, this fraud can sometimes be 
easily overlooked. One of the most common fictitious asset schemes is to simply create 
fictitious documents. In other instances, the equipment is leased, not owned, and this fact is 
not disclosed during the audit of fixed assets. Bogus fixed assets can sometimes be detected 
because the fixed asset addition makes no business sense. 
 
MISREPRESENTING THE VALUE OF FIXED ASSETS 
Fixed assets should be recorded at cost. Although assets may appreciate in value, this 
increase in value should not be recognized on company financial statements. Many financial 
statement frauds have involved the reporting of fixed assets at market values instead of the 
lower acquisition costs, or at even higher inflated values with phony valuations to support 
them. Further, companies may falsely inflate the value of fixed assets by failing to record 
impairments of long-lived assets (as required by FASB ASC 350-30-35) and of goodwill (as 
required by FASB ASC 350-20-35). Misrepresentat ion of asset values frequently goes hand 
in hand with other schemes.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In October 2002, the SEC filed a civil enforcement action against former Enron CFO 
Andrew S. Fastow, who also faced criminal charges, relating to an alleged self-enriching 
scheme to defraud Enron’s security holders through the use of  certain off-balance-sheet 
entities. One of the six transactions in the SEC’s complaint against Andrew Fastow 
involved Raptor I and Avici. According to the complaint, Enron and the Fastow-
 controlled partnership LJM2 engaged in complex transactions with an entity called Raptor 
I. Raptor I was used to manipulate Enron’s balance sheet and income statement and to 
generate profits for LJM2 and Fastow at Enron’s expense. In September 2000, Fastow 
and others used Raptor I to effectuate a fraudulent hedging transact ion and thus avoid a 
decrease in the value of Enron’s investment in  the stock of a public company called Avici 
Systems Inc. Specifically, Fastow and others back-dated documents to make it appear that 
Enron had locked in the value of its investment in Avici in August of 2000, when Avici’s 
stock was trading at its all time high price. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.321 
CAPITALIZING NON-ASSET COSTS 
Excluded from the cost of a purchased asset are interest and finance charges incurred in the 
purchase. For example, when a company finances a capital equipment purchase, monthly 
payments include both principal liability reduction and interest payments. On initial 
purchase, only the original cost of the asset should be capitalized. The subsequent interest 
payments should be charged to interest expense and not to the asset. Without a reason for 
intensive review, fraud of this type can go unchecked.  
 



:


fix asset
bogu fix asset can be creat by a varieti of method thei ar subject to manipul
through sever differ scheme some of the more common scheme ar book
fictiti asset misrepres asset valuat and capit nonasset cost
financi statement fraud financi transact
1320 2011 fraud examin manual
book fictiti asset
on of the easiest method of asset misrepresent is the record of fictiti asset
thi fals creation of asset affect account total on a compani balanc sheet the
correspond account commonli us is the owner equiti account becaus compani
asset ar often physic found in mani differ locat thi fraud can sometim be
easili overlook on of the most common fictiti asset scheme is to simpli creat
fictiti document in other instanc the equip is leas not own and thi fact is
not disclos dure the audit of fix asset bogu fix asset can sometim be detect
becaus the fix asset addit make no busi sens
misrepres the valu of fix asset
fix asset should be record at cost although asset mai appreci in valu thi
increas in valu should not be recogn on compani financi statement mani financi
statement fraud have involv the report of fix asset at market valu instead of the
lower acquisit cost or at even higher inflat valu with phoni valuat to support
them further compani mai fals inflat the valu of fix asset by fail to record
impair of longliv asset as requir by fasb asc 3503035 and of goodwil as
requir by fasb asc 3502035 misrepresentat ion of asset valu frequent goe hand
in hand with other scheme
exampl
in octob 2002 the sec file a civil enforc action against former enron cfo
andrew s fastow who also face crimin charg relat to an alleg selfenrich
scheme to defraud enron secur holder through the us of certain offbalancesheet
entiti on of the six transact in the sec complaint against andrew fastow
involv raptor i and avici accord to the complaint enron and the fastow
control partnership ljm2 engag in complex transact with an entiti call raptor
i raptor i wa us to manipul enron balanc sheet and incom statement and to
gener profit for ljm2 and fastow at enron expens in septemb 2000 fastow
and other us raptor i to effectu a fraudul hedg transact ion and thu avoid a
decreas in the valu of enron invest in the stock of a public compani call avici
system inc specif fastow and other backdat document to make it appear that
enron had lock in the valu of it invest in avici in august of 2000 when avici
stock wa trade at it all time high price
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1321
capit nonasset cost
exclud from the cost of a purchas asset ar interest and financ charg incur in the
purchas for exampl when a compani financ a capit equip purchas monthli
payment includ both princip liabil reduct and interest payment on initi
purchas onli the origin cost of the asset should be capit the subsequ interest
payment should be charg to interest expens and not to the asset without a reason for
intens review fraud of thi type can go uncheck
