2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/Capitalized Expenses


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Capitalized Expenses  
Capitalizing expenses is another way to increase income and assets because capitalized items 
are depreciated or amortized over a period of years rather than expensed immediately. If 
expenditures are capitalized as assets and not expensed during the current period, income 
will be overstated. As the assets are depreciated, income in subsequent periods will be 
understated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In November 2002, the SEC filed an am ended complaint against WorldCom, Inc., 
broadening its charges to allege that WorldCom  misled investors from at least as early as 
1999 through the first quarter of 2002. The complaint stated that the company had 
acknowledged that during that period Worl dCom materially overstated the income it 
reported on its financial statements by approx imately $9 billion, main ly using two methods. 
First, WorldCom reduced its operating expenses  by improperly releasing as a credit to 
operating expenses certain provisions previously established for line costs and for taxes. 
Second, the company improperly reduced its operating expenses by recharacterizing certain 
expenses as capital assets. Much  of the $9 billion related to  improper accounting for “line 
costs,” which were among WorldCom’s major operating expenses. The SEC complaint 
alleges that, in a scheme directed and approved by members of senior management, 
WorldCom concealed the true extent of its “l ine costs.” By improperly reducing provisions 
held against “line costs” and by transferring  certain “line costs” to its capital asset 
accounts, WorldCom falsely portrayed itself as a profitable business when it was not and 
concealed large losses. These improp er accounting practices were designed to and did inflate 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.325 
income to correspond with estimates by Wall Street analysts and to support the price of 
WorldCom’s stock. 
 
In March 2005, former WorldCom CEO Bernard Ebbers was convicted of one count of 
conspiracy, one count of securities fraud, and seven counts of false regulatory filing, and was 
later sentenced to 25 years in prison. He also agreed to forfeit nearly all of his personal 
assets to settle a civil suit filed by aggrieved WorldCom investors.  
 
Scott Sullivan, the former CFO under Ebbers and “the architect” behind the fraud 
scheme, pled guilty to fraud charges and agreed to testify against Ebbers. Due to his 
cooperation during the investigation, he was sentenced to only five years in prison. He also 
agreed to forfeit the proceeds from the sale of his $10 million home, along with his 401(k) 
holdings, to settle the civil suit brought by shareholders.  
 
Former WorldCom Controller David F. Myers and former Director of General 
Accounting Buford “Buddy” Yates, Jr., pled gu ilty to criminal charges prosecuted by the 
U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District of New York. Myers received a sentence  
of one year and one day in prison. Yates was also sentenced to one year and one day in 
prison and ordered to pay a $5,000 fine. Additionally, each man was permanently 
enjoined from acting as an officer or director  of any public company and was suspended from 
practicing before the SEC as an accountan t, under Rule 102(2) of the Commission’s 
Rules of Practice.  
 
The SEC also brought civil actions against former members of the WorldCom General 
Accounting Department, Betty L. Vinson, CPA and Troy M. Normand. Both were 
permanently enjoined from securities violation s. Vinson was suspended from appearing or 
practicing before the SEC as an accountant. In addition, she pled guilty to one count of 
securities fraud and one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud and was sentenced to 
five months in prison and five  months of house arrest. Norm and pled guilty to similar 
charges and received three years of probation for his role in the fraud.  
 
EXPENSING CAPITAL EXPENDITURES 
Just as capitalizing expenses is improper, so is expensing costs that should be capitalized. 
The organization may want to minimize its net income due to tax considerations, or to 
increase earnings in future periods. Expensing an item that should be depreciated over a 
period of time helps to accomplish just that—net income is lower and, therefore, so are 
taxes.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.326                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


capit expens
capit expens is anoth wai to increas incom and asset becaus capit item
ar depreci or amort over a period of year rather than expens immedi if
expenditur ar capit as asset and not expens dure the current period incom
will be overst as the asset ar depreci incom in subsequ period will be
underst
exampl
in novemb 2002 the sec file an am end complaint against worldcom inc
broaden it charg to alleg that worldcom misl investor from at least as earli as
1999 through the first quarter of 2002 the complaint state that the compani had
acknowledg that dure that period worl dcom materi overst the incom it
report on it financi statement by approx imat 9 billion main ly us two method
first worldcom reduc it oper expens by improperli releas as a credit to
oper expens certain provis previous establish for line cost and for tax
second the compani improperli reduc it oper expens by recharacter certain
expens as capit asset much of the 9 billion relat to improp account for line
cost which were among worldcom major oper expens the sec complaint
alleg that in a scheme direct and approv by member of senior manag
worldcom conceal the true extent of it l in cost by improperli reduc provis
held against line cost and by transfer certain line cost to it capit asset
account worldcom fals portrai itself as a profit busi when it wa not and
conceal larg loss these improp er account practic were design to and did inflat
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1325
incom to correspond with estim by wall street analyst and to support the price of
worldcom stock
in march 2005 former worldcom ceo bernard ebber wa convict of on count of
conspiraci on count of secur fraud and seven count of fals regulatori file and wa
later sentenc to 25 year in prison he also agre to forfeit nearli all of hi person
asset to settl a civil suit file by aggriev worldcom investor
scott sullivan the former cfo under ebber and the architect behind the fraud
scheme pled guilti to fraud charg and agre to testifi against ebber due to hi
cooper dure the investig he wa sentenc to onli five year in prison he also
agre to forfeit the proce from the sale of hi 10 million home along with hi 401k
hold to settl the civil suit brought by sharehold
former worldcom control david f myer and former director of gener
account buford buddi yate jr pled gu ilti to crimin charg prosecut by the
us attornei offic for the southern district of new york myer receiv a sentenc
of on year and on dai in prison yate wa also sentenc to on year and on dai in
prison and order to pai a 5000 fine addition each man wa perman
enjoin from act as an offic or director of ani public compani and wa suspend from
practic befor the sec as an accountan t under rule 1022 of the commiss
rule of practic
the sec also brought civil action against former member of the worldcom gener
account depart betti l vinson cpa and troi m normand both were
perman enjoin from secur violat s vinson wa suspend from appear or
practic befor the sec as an account in addit she pled guilti to on count of
secur fraud and on count of conspiraci to commit secur fraud and wa sentenc to
five month in prison and five month of hous arrest norm and pled guilti to similar
charg and receiv three year of probat for hi role in the fraud
expens capit expenditur
just as capit expens is improp so is expens cost that should be capit
the organ mai want to minim it net incom due to tax consider or to
increas earn in futur period expens an item that should be depreci over a
period of time help to accomplish just thatnet incom is lower and therefor so ar
tax
financi statement fraud financi transact
1326 2011 fraud examin manual
