2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Analysis


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Financial Statement Analysis  
Comparative financial statements provide information for current and past accounting 
periods. Accounts expressed in whole dollar amounts yield a limited amount of information. 
The conversion of these numbers into ratios or percentages allows the reader of the 
statements to analyze them based on their relationship to each other; in addition, it allows 
the reader to more readily compare current performance with past performance. In fraud 
detection and investigation, the determination of the reasons for relationships and changes 
in amounts can be important. These determinations are the red flags that point an examiner 
in the direction of possible fraud. If large enough, a fraudulent misstatement will affect the 
financial statements in such a way that relationships between the numbers become 
questionable. Many schemes are detected because  the financial statements, when analyzed 
closely, do not make sense. Financial statement analysis includes the following: 
• Vertical analysis 
• Horizontal analysis 
• Ratio analysis 
 
Percentage Analysis — Horizontal and Vertical  
There are traditionally two methods of percentage analysis of financial statements. Vertical 
analysis  is a technique for analyzing the relationships between the items on an income 
statement, balance sheet, or statement of cash flows by expressing components as 
percentages. This method is often referred to as “common sizing” financial statements. In 
the vertical analysis of an income statement, net sales is assigned 100 percent. For a balance 
sheet, total assets is assigned 100 percent on the asset side, and total liabilities and equity is 
expressed as 100 percent. All other items in each of the sections are expressed as a 
percentage of these numbers. 
 
Horizontal analysis  is a technique for analyzing the percentage change in individual financial 
statement items from one period to the next. The first period in the analysis is considered 
the base period, and the changes in the subsequent period are computed as a percentage of 
the base period. If more than two periods are presented, each period’s changes are computed 
as a percentage of the preceding period. As is the case with vertical analysis, this technique 
will not work for small, immaterial frauds.  
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.336                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following is an example of financial statements that are analyzed by both horizontal and 
vertical analysis: 
 
 
 
Vertical Analysis Discussion 
Vertical analysis  is the expression of the relationship or percentage of component items to a 
specific base item. In the above example, vertical analysis of the income statement includes 
total sales as the base amount, and all other items are then analyzed as a percentage of that 
total. Vertical analysis emphasizes the relationship of statement items wi thin each accounting 
period. These relationships can be used with historical averages to determine statement 
anomalies.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.337 
In the above example, we can observe that accounts payable makes up 29 percent of total 
liabilities in Year One. Historically, we may find that this account averages slightly over 25 
percent of total liabilities. In Year Two, accounts payable, as a percentage of total liabilities, 
increased to 51 percent. Although this increase may be explainable through a correlation 
with a rise in sales, such a significant increase could also be the starting point of a fraud 
examination. Source documents should be examined to determine the reason for the rise in 
this percentage. With this type of examination, fraudulent activity might be detected. The 
same type of change can be seen as selling expenses decline as a percentage of sales in Year 
Two from 20 percent to 17 percent. Again, this change may be explainable with higher 
volume sales or another bona fide explanation. But close examination may point a fraud 
examiner to uncover fictitious sales, since there was not a corresponding increase in selling 
expenses.  
 
Horizontal Analysis Discussion 
Horizontal statement analysis uses percentage comparison from one accounting period to the 
next. The percentage change is calculated by dividing the amount of increase or decrease for 
each item by the base period amount. The resulting percentages are then studied in detail. It 
is important to consider the amount of change as well as the percentage in horizontal 
comparisons. A 5 percent change in an account with a very large dollar amount may actually 
be much more of a change than a 50 percent change in an account with much less activity. 
 
In the above example, it is obvious that the 80 percent increase in sales has a much greater 
corresponding increase in cost of goods sold, which rose 140 percent. These accounts are 
often used to hide fraudulent expenses, withdrawals, or other illegal transactions.  
 
Ratios Analysis 
Ratio analysis  is a means of measuring the relationship between two different financial 
statement amounts. The relationship and comparison are the keys to the analysis. Many 
professionals, including bankers, investors, and business owners, as well as major investment 
firms, use this method. Ratio analysis allows for internal evaluations using financial statement 
data. Traditionally, financial statement ratios are compared to an entity’s industry averages. 
The ratios and comparisons can be very useful in detecting red flags for a fraud examination.  
 
The financial ratios present a significant change from one year to the next, or over a period 
of years, it becomes obvious that there may a problem. As in all other analysis, specific 
changes are often explained by changes in the business operations. Analyses change in 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.338                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 
Cash+Securities+Receivables
 Current Liabilities 
specific ratios is detected, the appropriate source accounts should be researched and 
examined in detail to determine if fraud has occurred. For instance, a significant decrease in 
a company’s current ratio may point to an incr ease in current liabilities or a reduction in 
assets, both of which could be used to cover fraud.  
 
In the analysis of financial statements, each reader of the statements will determine which 
portions are most important. Like the statement analysis discussed previously, the analysis of 
ratios is limited by its inability to detect fraud on a smaller, immaterial scale. Some of the 
types of financial ratio comparisons are shown below. 
 
Many of the possible ratios are used in industry-specific situations, but the nine comparisons 
mentioned below are ratios that may lead to discovery of fraud. The following calculations 
are based on the example financial statements presented earlier: 
 
Common Financial Ratios 
CURRENT RATIO 
The current ratio—current assets to current 
liabilities—is probably the most commonly used ratio in financial statement analysis. This 
comparison measures a company’s ability to meet  present obligations from its liquid assets. 
The number of times that current assets exceed current liabilities has long been a quick 
measure of financial strength.  
 
In detecting fraud, this ratio can be a prime indicator of manipulation of the accounts 
involved. Embezzlement will cause the ratio to decrease. Liability concealment will cause a 
more favorable ratio. 
 
In the case example, the drastic change in the current ratio from Year One (2.84) to Year 
Two (1.70) should cause an examiner to look at these accounts in more detail. For instance, 
a check-tampering scheme will usually result in a decrease in the current asset, cash, which 
will in turn decrease the ratio.  
 
QUICK RATIO 
The quick ratio, often referred to as the acid test ratio, 
compares the most liquid assets to current liabilities. This calculation divides the total of 
cash, securities, and receivables by current liabilities to yield a measure of a company’s ability 
to meet sudden cash requirements. The quick ratio is a conservative measure of liquidity that 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.339 
Net Sales on Account 
Average Net Receivables 
365 
Receivable Turnover 
Cost of Goods Sold 
Average Inventory 
is often used in turbulent economic times to provide an analyst with a worst-case scenario of 
a company’s working capital situation.  
 
An examiner will analyze the quick ratio for fraud indicators. In Year One of the example, 
the company balance sheet reflects a quick ratio of 2.05. This ratio drops to 1.00 in Year 
Two. In this situation, a closer review of accounts receivable shows they are increasing at an 
unusual rates, which could indicate that fictitious accounts receivable have been added to 
inflate sales. Of more concern perhaps is the increase in accounts payable, which might 
require, at a minimum, a closer review to determine why. 
 
RECEIVABLE TURNOVER 
Receivable turnover is defined as net sales on account 
divided by average net receivables. It measures the number of times accounts receivable is 
turned over during the accounting period. In other words, it measures the time between on-
 account sales and collection of funds. This ratio is one that uses both income statement and 
balance sheet accounts in its analysis. If the fraud includes fictitious sales, this bogus income 
will never be collected. As a result, the turnover of receivables will decrease.  
 
COLLECTION RATIO   
Accounts receivable aging is measured by the 
collection ratio. It divides 365 days by the receivable turnover ratio to arrive at the average 
number of days to collect receivables. In general, the lower the collection ratio, the faster 
receivables are collected. A fraud examiner may use this ratio as a first step in detecting 
fictitious receivables or larceny and skimming schemes. Normally, this ratio will stay fairly 
consistent from year to year, but changes in billing policies or collection efforts may cause a 
fluctuation. The example shows a favorable reduction in the collection ratio from 226.3 in 
Year One to 170.33 in Year Two. This means that the company is collecting its receivables 
more quickly in Year Two than in Year One.  
 
INVENTORY TURNOVER  
The relationship between a company’s cost of goods 
sold and average inventory is shown through the inventory turnover ratio. This ratio 
measures the number of times inventory is sold during the period. This ratio is a good 
determinant of purchasing, production, and sales efficiency. In general, a higher inventory 
turnover ratio is considered more favorable. For example, if cost of goods sold has increased 
due to theft of inventory (ending inventory has declined, but not through sales), then this 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.340                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
365 
Inventory Turnover 
Total Liabilities  
Total Equity 
Net Income 
Net Sales 
ratio will be abnormally high. In the case example, inventory turnover increases in Year Two, 
signaling the possibility that an embezzlement is buried in the inventory account. An 
examiner should investigate the changes in the components of the ratio to determine where 
to look for possible fraud. 
 
AVERAGE NUMBER OF DAYS INVENTORY IS IN STOCK  
The average number of days inventory is in stock ratio is a 
restatement of the inventory turnover ratio expressed in days. This rate is important for 
several reasons. An increase in the number of days inventory stays in stock causes additional 
expenses, including storage costs, risk of inventory obsolescence, and market price 
reductions, as well as interest and other expenses incurred due to tying up funds in inventory 
stock. Inconsistency or significant variance in this ratio is a red flag for fraud investigators. 
Examiners may use this ratio to examine inventory accounts for possible larceny schemes. 
Purchasing and receiving inventory schemes can affect the ratio. As well, understating the 
cost of goods sold will result in an increase in the ratio. Significant changes in the inventory 
turnover ratio are good indicators of possible fraudulent inventory activity. 
 
DEBT TO EQUITY RATIO  
The debt to equity ratio is computed by dividing total 
liabilities by total equity. This ratio is one that is heavily 
considered by lending institutions. It provides a clear picture of the relative risk assumed by 
the creditors and owners. The higher the ratio, the more difficult it will be for the owners to 
raise capital by increasing long-term debt. Debt to equity requirements are often included as 
borrowing covenants in corporate lending agreements. The example displays a very 
favorable Year One ratio of 0.89. Year Two, however, shows a ratio of 1.84, which indicates 
that debt is greatly increasing. In this case, the increase in the ratio corresponds with the rise 
in accounts payable. Sudden changes in this ratio may signal an examiner to look for fraud.  
 
PROFIT MARGIN    
Profit margin ratio is defined as net income divided by 
net sales. This ratio is often referred to as the efficiency ratio, in that it reveals profits earned 
per dollar of sales. This percentage of net income to sales relates not only the effects of gross 
margin changes, but also charges to sales and administrative expenses. As fraud is 
committed, net income will be artificially overstated, and the profit margin ratio will be 
abnormally high. False expenses and fraudulent disbursements will cause an increase in 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.341 
Net Sales 
Average Assets 
expenses and a decrease in the profit margin ratio. Over time, this ratio should be  
fairly consistent. 
 
ASSET TURNOVER 
Net sales divided by average operating assets is the 
calculation used to determine the asset turnover ratio. This ratio is used to determine the 
efficiency with which asset resources are utilized. The case example displays a greater use of 
assets in Year Two than in Year One. 
 
By performing an analysis of the financial statements, the examiner may be directed toward 
the direct evidence to resolve an allegation of fraud. After performing a financial statement 
analysis, the examiner can select statistical samples in the target account and eventually 
examine the source documents. If an irregularity of overstatement is suspected, begin the 
examination with the financial statements. If, however, an irregularity of understatement is 
suspected, begin the examination with a review of the source documents. This rule of thumb 
is especially effective in the area of omission of liabilities, such as litigation, contingent 
liabilities, leases, and some product warranties.  
 
Tax Return Review 
Tax returns are good sources of additional and comparative information on the operations 
of the business. A complete review and comparison to the financial statement may provide 
information unknown to the lender, or disclose unexplained discrepancies. Again, the lack of 
properly prepared or timely filed tax returns may be a method of stalling or not providing 
the required information. Most perpetrators of fraud are reluctant to continue the deception 
and falsify a tax return. Year-after-year extensions and filing of the tax returns on the last 
possible date could be a ploy to cover up financial statement and tax return differences. 
 
 



:


financi statement analysi
compar financi statement provid inform for current and past account
period account express in whole dollar amount yield a limit amount of inform
the convers of these number into ratio or percentag allow the reader of the
statement to analyz them base on their relationship to each other in addit it allow
the reader to more readili compar current perform with past perform in fraud
detect and investig the determin of the reason for relationship and chang
in amount can be import these determin ar the red flag that point an examin
in the direct of possibl fraud if larg enough a fraudul misstat will affect the
financi statement in such a wai that relationship between the number becom
question mani scheme ar detect becaus the financi statement when analyz
close do not make sens financi statement analysi includ the follow
vertic analysi
horizont analysi
ratio analysi
percentag analysi horizont and vertic
there ar tradition two method of percentag analysi of financi statement vertic
analysi is a techniqu for analyz the relationship between the item on an incom
statement balanc sheet or statement of cash flow by express compon as
percentag thi method is often refer to as common size financi statement in
the vertic analysi of an incom statement net sale is assign 100 percent for a balanc
sheet total asset is assign 100 percent on the asset side and total liabil and equiti is
express as 100 percent all other item in each of the section ar express as a
percentag of these number
horizont analysi is a techniqu for analyz the percentag chang in individu financi
statement item from on period to the next the first period in the analysi is consid
the base period and the chang in the subsequ period ar comput as a percentag of
the base period if more than two period ar present each period chang ar comput
as a percentag of the preced period as is the case with vertic analysi thi techniqu
will not work for small immateri fraud
financi statement fraud financi transact
1336 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow is an exampl of financi statement that ar analyz by both horizont and
vertic analysi
vertic analysi discuss
vertic analysi is the express of the relationship or percentag of compon item to a
specif base item in the abov exampl vertic analysi of the incom statement includ
total sale as the base amount and all other item ar then analyz as a percentag of that
total vertic analysi emphas the relationship of statement item wi thin each account
period these relationship can be us with histor averag to determin statement
anomali
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1337
in the abov exampl we can observ that account payabl make up 29 percent of total
liabil in year on histor we mai find that thi account averag slightli over 25
percent of total liabil in year two account payabl as a percentag of total liabil
increas to 51 percent although thi increas mai be explain through a correl
with a rise in sale such a signific increas could also be the start point of a fraud
examin sourc document should be examin to determin the reason for the rise in
thi percentag with thi type of examin fraudul activ might be detect the
same type of chang can be seen as sell expens declin as a percentag of sale in year
two from 20 percent to 17 percent again thi chang mai be explain with higher
volum sale or anoth bona fide explan but close examin mai point a fraud
examin to uncov fictiti sale sinc there wa not a correspond increas in sell
expens
horizont analysi discuss
horizont statement analysi us percentag comparison from on account period to the
next the percentag chang is calcul by divid the amount of increas or decreas for
each item by the base period amount the result percentag ar then studi in detail it
is import to consid the amount of chang as well as the percentag in horizont
comparison a 5 percent chang in an account with a veri larg dollar amount mai actual
be much more of a chang than a 50 percent chang in an account with much less activ
in the abov exampl it is obviou that the 80 percent increas in sale ha a much greater
correspond increas in cost of good sold which rose 140 percent these account ar
often us to hide fraudul expens withdraw or other illeg transact
ratio analysi
ratio analysi is a mean of measur the relationship between two differ financi
statement amount the relationship and comparison ar the kei to the analysi mani
profession includ banker investor and busi owner as well as major invest
firm us thi method ratio analysi allow for intern evalu us financi statement
data tradition financi statement ratio ar compar to an entiti industri averag
the ratio and comparison can be veri us in detect red flag for a fraud examin
the financi ratio present a signific chang from on year to the next or over a period
of year it becom obviou that there mai a problem as in all other analysi specif
chang ar often explain by chang in the busi oper analys chang in
financi statement fraud financi transact
1338 2011 fraud examin manual
current asset
current liabil
cashsecuritiesreceiv
current liabil
specif ratio is detect the appropri sourc account should be research and
examin in detail to determin if fraud ha occur for instanc a signific decreas in
a compani current ratio mai point to an incr eas in current liabil or a reduct in
asset both of which could be us to cover fraud
in the analysi of financi statement each reader of the statement will determin which
portion ar most import like the statement analysi discuss previous the analysi of
ratio is limit by it inabl to detect fraud on a smaller immateri scale some of the
type of financi ratio comparison ar shown below
mani of the possibl ratio ar us in industryspecif situat but the nine comparison
mention below ar ratio that mai lead to discoveri of fraud the follow calcul
ar base on the exampl financi statement present earlier
common financi ratio
current ratio
the current ratiocurr asset to current
liabilitiesi probabl the most commonli us ratio in financi statement analysi thi
comparison measur a compani abil to meet present oblig from it liquid asset
the number of time that current asset exce current liabil ha long been a quick
measur of financi strength
in detect fraud thi ratio can be a prime indic of manipul of the account
involv embezzl will caus the ratio to decreas liabil conceal will caus a
more favor ratio
in the case exampl the drastic chang in the current ratio from year on 284 to year
two 170 should caus an examin to look at these account in more detail for instanc
a checktamp scheme will usual result in a decreas in the current asset cash which
will in turn decreas the ratio
quick ratio
the quick ratio often refer to as the acid test ratio
compar the most liquid asset to current liabil thi calcul divid the total of
cash secur and receiv by current liabil to yield a measur of a compani abil
to meet sudden cash requir the quick ratio is a conserv measur of liquid that
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1339
net sale on account
averag net receiv
365
receiv turnov
cost of good sold
averag inventori
is often us in turbul econom time to provid an analyst with a worstcas scenario of
a compani work capit situat
an examin will analyz the quick ratio for fraud indic in year on of the exampl
the compani balanc sheet reflect a quick ratio of 205 thi ratio drop to 100 in year
two in thi situat a closer review of account receiv show thei ar increas at an
unusu rate which could indic that fictiti account receiv have been ad to
inflat sale of more concern perhap is the increas in account payabl which might
requir at a minimum a closer review to determin why
receiv turnov
receiv turnov is defin as net sale on account
divid by averag net receiv it measur the number of time account receiv is
turn over dure the account period in other word it measur the time between on
account sale and collect of fund thi ratio is on that us both incom statement and
balanc sheet account in it analysi if the fraud includ fictiti sale thi bogu incom
will never be collect as a result the turnov of receiv will decreas
collect ratio
account receiv ag is measur by the
collect ratio it divid 365 dai by the receiv turnov ratio to arriv at the averag
number of dai to collect receiv in gener the lower the collect ratio the faster
receiv ar collect a fraud examin mai us thi ratio as a first step in detect
fictiti receiv or larceni and skim scheme normal thi ratio will stai fairli
consist from year to year but chang in bill polici or collect effort mai caus a
fluctuat the exampl show a favor reduct in the collect ratio from 2263 in
year on to 17033 in year two thi mean that the compani is collect it receiv
more quickli in year two than in year on
inventori turnov
the relationship between a compani cost of good
sold and averag inventori is shown through the inventori turnov ratio thi ratio
measur the number of time inventori is sold dure the period thi ratio is a good
determin of purchas product and sale effici in gener a higher inventori
turnov ratio is consid more favor for exampl if cost of good sold ha increas
due to theft of inventori end inventori ha declin but not through sale then thi
financi statement fraud financi transact
1340 2011 fraud examin manual
365
inventori turnov
total liabil
total equiti
net incom
net sale
ratio will be abnorm high in the case exampl inventori turnov increas in year two
signal the possibl that an embezzl is buri in the inventori account an
examin should investig the chang in the compon of the ratio to determin where
to look for possibl fraud
averag number of dai inventori is in stock
the averag number of dai inventori is in stock ratio is a
restat of the inventori turnov ratio express in dai thi rate is import for
sever reason an increas in the number of dai inventori stai in stock caus addit
expens includ storag cost risk of inventori obsolesc and market price
reduct as well as interest and other expens incur due to ty up fund in inventori
stock inconsist or signific varianc in thi ratio is a red flag for fraud investig
examin mai us thi ratio to examin inventori account for possibl larceni scheme
purchas and receiv inventori scheme can affect the ratio as well underst the
cost of good sold will result in an increas in the ratio signific chang in the inventori
turnov ratio ar good indic of possibl fraudul inventori activ
debt to equiti ratio
the debt to equiti ratio is comput by divid total
liabil by total equiti thi ratio is on that is heavili
consid by lend institut it provid a clear pictur of the rel risk assum by
the creditor and owner the higher the ratio the more difficult it will be for the owner to
rais capit by increas longterm debt debt to equiti requir ar often includ as
borrow coven in corpor lend agreement the exampl displai a veri
favor year on ratio of 089 year two howev show a ratio of 184 which indic
that debt is greatli increas in thi case the increas in the ratio correspond with the rise
in account payabl sudden chang in thi ratio mai signal an examin to look for fraud
profit margin
profit margin ratio is defin as net incom divid by
net sale thi ratio is often refer to as the effici ratio in that it reveal profit earn
per dollar of sale thi percentag of net incom to sale relat not onli the effect of gross
margin chang but also charg to sale and administr expens as fraud is
commit net incom will be artifici overst and the profit margin ratio will be
abnorm high fals expens and fraudul disburs will caus an increas in
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1341
net sale
averag asset
expens and a decreas in the profit margin ratio over time thi ratio should be
fairli consist
asset turnov
net sale divid by averag oper asset is the
calcul us to determin the asset turnov ratio thi ratio is us to determin the
effici with which asset resourc ar util the case exampl displai a greater us of
asset in year two than in year on
by perform an analysi of the financi statement the examin mai be direct toward
the direct evid to resolv an alleg of fraud after perform a financi statement
analysi the examin can select statist sampl in the target account and eventu
examin the sourc document if an irregular of overstat is suspect begin the
examin with the financi statement if howev an irregular of understat is
suspect begin the examin with a review of the sourc document thi rule of thumb
is especi effect in the area of omiss of liabil such as litig conting
liabil leas and some product warranti
tax return review
tax return ar good sourc of addit and compar inform on the oper
of the busi a complet review and comparison to the financi statement mai provid
inform unknown to the lender or disclos unexplain discrep again the lack of
properli prepar or time file tax return mai be a method of stall or not provid
the requir inform most perpetr of fraud ar reluct to continu the decept
and falsifi a tax return yearafteryear extens and file of the tax return on the last
possibl date could be a ploi to cover up financi statement and tax return differ
