2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Analysis/Common Financial Ratios


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Common Financial Ratios 
CURRENT RATIO 
The current ratio—current assets to current 
liabilities—is probably the most commonly used ratio in financial statement analysis. This 
comparison measures a company’s ability to meet  present obligations from its liquid assets. 
The number of times that current assets exceed current liabilities has long been a quick 
measure of financial strength.  
 
In detecting fraud, this ratio can be a prime indicator of manipulation of the accounts 
involved. Embezzlement will cause the ratio to decrease. Liability concealment will cause a 
more favorable ratio. 
 
In the case example, the drastic change in the current ratio from Year One (2.84) to Year 
Two (1.70) should cause an examiner to look at these accounts in more detail. For instance, 
a check-tampering scheme will usually result in a decrease in the current asset, cash, which 
will in turn decrease the ratio.  
 
QUICK RATIO 
The quick ratio, often referred to as the acid test ratio, 
compares the most liquid assets to current liabilities. This calculation divides the total of 
cash, securities, and receivables by current liabilities to yield a measure of a company’s ability 
to meet sudden cash requirements. The quick ratio is a conservative measure of liquidity that 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.339 
Net Sales on Account 
Average Net Receivables 
365 
Receivable Turnover 
Cost of Goods Sold 
Average Inventory 
is often used in turbulent economic times to provide an analyst with a worst-case scenario of 
a company’s working capital situation.  
 
An examiner will analyze the quick ratio for fraud indicators. In Year One of the example, 
the company balance sheet reflects a quick ratio of 2.05. This ratio drops to 1.00 in Year 
Two. In this situation, a closer review of accounts receivable shows they are increasing at an 
unusual rates, which could indicate that fictitious accounts receivable have been added to 
inflate sales. Of more concern perhaps is the increase in accounts payable, which might 
require, at a minimum, a closer review to determine why. 
 
RECEIVABLE TURNOVER 
Receivable turnover is defined as net sales on account 
divided by average net receivables. It measures the number of times accounts receivable is 
turned over during the accounting period. In other words, it measures the time between on-
 account sales and collection of funds. This ratio is one that uses both income statement and 
balance sheet accounts in its analysis. If the fraud includes fictitious sales, this bogus income 
will never be collected. As a result, the turnover of receivables will decrease.  
 
COLLECTION RATIO   
Accounts receivable aging is measured by the 
collection ratio. It divides 365 days by the receivable turnover ratio to arrive at the average 
number of days to collect receivables. In general, the lower the collection ratio, the faster 
receivables are collected. A fraud examiner may use this ratio as a first step in detecting 
fictitious receivables or larceny and skimming schemes. Normally, this ratio will stay fairly 
consistent from year to year, but changes in billing policies or collection efforts may cause a 
fluctuation. The example shows a favorable reduction in the collection ratio from 226.3 in 
Year One to 170.33 in Year Two. This means that the company is collecting its receivables 
more quickly in Year Two than in Year One.  
 
INVENTORY TURNOVER  
The relationship between a company’s cost of goods 
sold and average inventory is shown through the inventory turnover ratio. This ratio 
measures the number of times inventory is sold during the period. This ratio is a good 
determinant of purchasing, production, and sales efficiency. In general, a higher inventory 
turnover ratio is considered more favorable. For example, if cost of goods sold has increased 
due to theft of inventory (ending inventory has declined, but not through sales), then this 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.340                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
365 
Inventory Turnover 
Total Liabilities  
Total Equity 
Net Income 
Net Sales 
ratio will be abnormally high. In the case example, inventory turnover increases in Year Two, 
signaling the possibility that an embezzlement is buried in the inventory account. An 
examiner should investigate the changes in the components of the ratio to determine where 
to look for possible fraud. 
 
AVERAGE NUMBER OF DAYS INVENTORY IS IN STOCK  
The average number of days inventory is in stock ratio is a 
restatement of the inventory turnover ratio expressed in days. This rate is important for 
several reasons. An increase in the number of days inventory stays in stock causes additional 
expenses, including storage costs, risk of inventory obsolescence, and market price 
reductions, as well as interest and other expenses incurred due to tying up funds in inventory 
stock. Inconsistency or significant variance in this ratio is a red flag for fraud investigators. 
Examiners may use this ratio to examine inventory accounts for possible larceny schemes. 
Purchasing and receiving inventory schemes can affect the ratio. As well, understating the 
cost of goods sold will result in an increase in the ratio. Significant changes in the inventory 
turnover ratio are good indicators of possible fraudulent inventory activity. 
 
DEBT TO EQUITY RATIO  
The debt to equity ratio is computed by dividing total 
liabilities by total equity. This ratio is one that is heavily 
considered by lending institutions. It provides a clear picture of the relative risk assumed by 
the creditors and owners. The higher the ratio, the more difficult it will be for the owners to 
raise capital by increasing long-term debt. Debt to equity requirements are often included as 
borrowing covenants in corporate lending agreements. The example displays a very 
favorable Year One ratio of 0.89. Year Two, however, shows a ratio of 1.84, which indicates 
that debt is greatly increasing. In this case, the increase in the ratio corresponds with the rise 
in accounts payable. Sudden changes in this ratio may signal an examiner to look for fraud.  
 
PROFIT MARGIN    
Profit margin ratio is defined as net income divided by 
net sales. This ratio is often referred to as the efficiency ratio, in that it reveals profits earned 
per dollar of sales. This percentage of net income to sales relates not only the effects of gross 
margin changes, but also charges to sales and administrative expenses. As fraud is 
committed, net income will be artificially overstated, and the profit margin ratio will be 
abnormally high. False expenses and fraudulent disbursements will cause an increase in 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.341 
Net Sales 
Average Assets 
expenses and a decrease in the profit margin ratio. Over time, this ratio should be  
fairly consistent. 
 
ASSET TURNOVER 
Net sales divided by average operating assets is the 
calculation used to determine the asset turnover ratio. This ratio is used to determine the 
efficiency with which asset resources are utilized. The case example displays a greater use of 
assets in Year Two than in Year One. 
 
By performing an analysis of the financial statements, the examiner may be directed toward 
the direct evidence to resolve an allegation of fraud. After performing a financial statement 
analysis, the examiner can select statistical samples in the target account and eventually 
examine the source documents. If an irregularity of overstatement is suspected, begin the 
examination with the financial statements. If, however, an irregularity of understatement is 
suspected, begin the examination with a review of the source documents. This rule of thumb 
is especially effective in the area of omission of liabilities, such as litigation, contingent 
liabilities, leases, and some product warranties.  
 



:


common financi ratio
current ratio
the current ratiocurr asset to current
liabilitiesi probabl the most commonli us ratio in financi statement analysi thi
comparison measur a compani abil to meet present oblig from it liquid asset
the number of time that current asset exce current liabil ha long been a quick
measur of financi strength
in detect fraud thi ratio can be a prime indic of manipul of the account
involv embezzl will caus the ratio to decreas liabil conceal will caus a
more favor ratio
in the case exampl the drastic chang in the current ratio from year on 284 to year
two 170 should caus an examin to look at these account in more detail for instanc
a checktamp scheme will usual result in a decreas in the current asset cash which
will in turn decreas the ratio
quick ratio
the quick ratio often refer to as the acid test ratio
compar the most liquid asset to current liabil thi calcul divid the total of
cash secur and receiv by current liabil to yield a measur of a compani abil
to meet sudden cash requir the quick ratio is a conserv measur of liquid that
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1339
net sale on account
averag net receiv
365
receiv turnov
cost of good sold
averag inventori
is often us in turbul econom time to provid an analyst with a worstcas scenario of
a compani work capit situat
an examin will analyz the quick ratio for fraud indic in year on of the exampl
the compani balanc sheet reflect a quick ratio of 205 thi ratio drop to 100 in year
two in thi situat a closer review of account receiv show thei ar increas at an
unusu rate which could indic that fictiti account receiv have been ad to
inflat sale of more concern perhap is the increas in account payabl which might
requir at a minimum a closer review to determin why
receiv turnov
receiv turnov is defin as net sale on account
divid by averag net receiv it measur the number of time account receiv is
turn over dure the account period in other word it measur the time between on
account sale and collect of fund thi ratio is on that us both incom statement and
balanc sheet account in it analysi if the fraud includ fictiti sale thi bogu incom
will never be collect as a result the turnov of receiv will decreas
collect ratio
account receiv ag is measur by the
collect ratio it divid 365 dai by the receiv turnov ratio to arriv at the averag
number of dai to collect receiv in gener the lower the collect ratio the faster
receiv ar collect a fraud examin mai us thi ratio as a first step in detect
fictiti receiv or larceni and skim scheme normal thi ratio will stai fairli
consist from year to year but chang in bill polici or collect effort mai caus a
fluctuat the exampl show a favor reduct in the collect ratio from 2263 in
year on to 17033 in year two thi mean that the compani is collect it receiv
more quickli in year two than in year on
inventori turnov
the relationship between a compani cost of good
sold and averag inventori is shown through the inventori turnov ratio thi ratio
measur the number of time inventori is sold dure the period thi ratio is a good
determin of purchas product and sale effici in gener a higher inventori
turnov ratio is consid more favor for exampl if cost of good sold ha increas
due to theft of inventori end inventori ha declin but not through sale then thi
financi statement fraud financi transact
1340 2011 fraud examin manual
365
inventori turnov
total liabil
total equiti
net incom
net sale
ratio will be abnorm high in the case exampl inventori turnov increas in year two
signal the possibl that an embezzl is buri in the inventori account an
examin should investig the chang in the compon of the ratio to determin where
to look for possibl fraud
averag number of dai inventori is in stock
the averag number of dai inventori is in stock ratio is a
restat of the inventori turnov ratio express in dai thi rate is import for
sever reason an increas in the number of dai inventori stai in stock caus addit
expens includ storag cost risk of inventori obsolesc and market price
reduct as well as interest and other expens incur due to ty up fund in inventori
stock inconsist or signific varianc in thi ratio is a red flag for fraud investig
examin mai us thi ratio to examin inventori account for possibl larceni scheme
purchas and receiv inventori scheme can affect the ratio as well underst the
cost of good sold will result in an increas in the ratio signific chang in the inventori
turnov ratio ar good indic of possibl fraudul inventori activ
debt to equiti ratio
the debt to equiti ratio is comput by divid total
liabil by total equiti thi ratio is on that is heavili
consid by lend institut it provid a clear pictur of the rel risk assum by
the creditor and owner the higher the ratio the more difficult it will be for the owner to
rais capit by increas longterm debt debt to equiti requir ar often includ as
borrow coven in corpor lend agreement the exampl displai a veri
favor year on ratio of 089 year two howev show a ratio of 184 which indic
that debt is greatli increas in thi case the increas in the ratio correspond with the rise
in account payabl sudden chang in thi ratio mai signal an examin to look for fraud
profit margin
profit margin ratio is defin as net incom divid by
net sale thi ratio is often refer to as the effici ratio in that it reveal profit earn
per dollar of sale thi percentag of net incom to sale relat not onli the effect of gross
margin chang but also charg to sale and administr expens as fraud is
commit net incom will be artifici overst and the profit margin ratio will be
abnorm high fals expens and fraudul disburs will caus an increas in
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1341
net sale
averag asset
expens and a decreas in the profit margin ratio over time thi ratio should be
fairli consist
asset turnov
net sale divid by averag oper asset is the
calcul us to determin the asset turnov ratio thi ratio is us to determin the
effici with which asset resourc ar util the case exampl displai a greater us of
asset in year two than in year on
by perform an analysi of the financi statement the examin mai be direct toward
the direct evid to resolv an alleg of fraud after perform a financi statement
analysi the examin can select statist sampl in the target account and eventu
examin the sourc document if an irregular of overstat is suspect begin the
examin with the financi statement if howev an irregular of understat is
suspect begin the examin with a review of the sourc document thi rule of thumb
is especi effect in the area of omiss of liabil such as litig conting
liabil leas and some product warranti
