2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases 
For in-depth interviewing techniques, please refer to the “Interview Theory and 
Application” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial statement fraud does not occur in an isolated environment. People in organizations 
who have both motive and opportunity are the prime candidates to commit fraudulent 
misstatement. In the overwhelming majority of situations, two key managers participate 
actively in the fraud: the chief executive officer and the chief financial officer. Others 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.342                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
become involved largely out of necessity. Those who are not directly involved most often 
are not aware that anything is wrong.  
 
Investigations of financial statement frauds are unique in that they almost always involve 
interviewing the executive management of the organization. To detect or deter financial 
statement fraud, it is absolutely necessary that top management be interviewed by a 
competent and experienced fraud examiner who possesses the ability to solicit honest 
answers to tough — but vital— questions about whether anyone has tampered with the books.  
 
Interviewing Techniques 
Situations in which accountants are tempted to misstate financial statements most often 
involve pressure connected with financial performance. The following is a fictitious 
conversation between upper managers of a corporation. The example shows how the 
pressure to commit financial statement fraud can greatly influence accounting personnel. 
 
CFO: (To CEO) “Boss, it looks like we will not have a good year financially. We told 
the shareholders (or bank) that our earnings would be $4 a share, and it looks like we’ll 
be very lucky to even make $3.” 
 
CEO: “Well, what are we going to do about it? If we miss the earnings projections (or 
don’t get the loan) our gooses will be cooked; we’ll both lose our jobs. We must get those 
earnings up to where they should be.” 
 
CFO: “What do you mean?” 
 
CEO: “What I mean is that it is your job to bring in the numbers. You’re going to have 
to find a way to get them up. I’m sure we can probably make up the difference next year, 
but for now, you get our earnings/assets/equity up however you have to. All financial 
statements are essentially estimates anyhow. So you figure out how to ‘estimate’ the numbers 
more in our favor. I don’t know how to do it, and I don’t want you to tell me. But get it 
done.” 
 
The CFO faces a dilemma: cook the books or lose his job. The actions of the CFO are very 
hard to predict. If he steps over the edge, chances are he will need to enlist the aid of 
accounting and clerical personnel to carry out the details, even if these employees do not 
know what they are actually doing. For example, the CFO might tell the chief accountant to 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.343 
book certain receivables and income, which would produce the needed effect—pumping up 
the equity. Such a scheme might only be apparent to the real insiders.  
 
In order to detect financial statement frauds through interviews, management and key 
support staff must be interviewed. Fraud examiners and auditors (collectively referred to as 
“examiners”) must consider many import ant issues when conducting interviews. One 
important issue examiners should keep in mind when conducting interviews is that there is 
generally no liability in asking questions in which they have a legitimate interest, no matter 
how insulting the questions might be to the respondents. Examiners, therefore, have the 
legal right to be fearless in asking questions, as long as the questions are asked privately and 
under reasonable circumstances. This legal right doesn’t extend to accusations—only to 
questions. “Are you still cooking the books?” is an accusation, whereas, “Are you cooking 
the books?” is a question. It is important to know the difference and to frame questions 
accordingly.  
 
Examiners should also be sure to interview only one person at a time. Groups of people 
should not be interviewed together because members tend to influence each other. The 
interviews should always be conducted under private conditions, which permit the 
respondent to answer candidly. 
 
It is important that examiners aim to be nonthreatening in their interview approaches. The 
less threatening the interviewer appears, the less reluctant the respondent will be to answer 
questions. An interviewer should not be judgmental or show surprise or disgust; such actions 
can inhibit the flow of information.  
 
Examiners should warm up respondents thoroughly before asking sensitive questions. It is 
best to obtain all of the procedural information and information pertaining to internal 
controls prior to discussing fraud. Fraud should usually be the last thing covered in an 
interview.  
 
In order to reduce the possibility of offending respondents, examiners can explain the nature 
of their interests before asking sensitive questions. For example, an examiner can say “As you 
know, as an auditor, I am required to actively look  for fraud. This means I must ask you some direct 
questions about the subject. Do you understand?” Then, after obtaining a positive response, the 
examiner can proceed to ask questions about fraud. It is best to ask the least difficult 
questions first. 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.344                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another approach examiners can take to make tough interview questions more palatable is 
to phrase them hypothetically, especially during the beginning of the interview. For example, 
rather than asking a chief financial officer, “Have you committed fraud?” an examiner can 
say to the executive, “Suppose someone in the po sition of chief financial officer decided to 
pump up the financials. How would he do it?” The latter question is far more likely to illicit 
specific information than the former. Later in the interview, the executive should be asked 
specifically if he has committed the fraud. The examiner can say something along the lines of 
“My professional responsibilities require me to ask you one particularly sensitive direct 
question. Have you committed fraud or other illegal acts against the company?” The vast 
majority of respondents will answer “No” to  such a question without hesitation, whether 
they have or not; however, simply asking the question places the examiner in a much more 
favorable position if attacked professionally for not detecting a fraud. 
 
The Interview 
Fraud examiners and auditors should ask questions designed to elicit the most specific 
information possible in a professional manner.  
 
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
Generally, the CEO should be interviewed first in any proactive or reactive fraud situation. 
There are several good reasons for this approach. First of all, the auditor or fraud examiner 
must have a thorough understanding with management as to what his responsibilities in this 
area are. Second, it is unwise to conduct sensitive inquiries within any organization without 
first advising the CEO. If he learns from some other source that you are making discreet 
fraud-related inquiries without telling him, he is more likely to misunderstand your objectives 
and take the inquiry as a personal affront. Third, if there is any significant cooking of the 
books, the CEO is almost always involved. The fraud-related questions you should ask in 
connection with a regular audit should include, at a minimum, the following. Note how the 
questions are for “set up” purposes. 
 
1. Mr. CEO, as you know, we are required to assess the risk that material fraud exists in every company, 
not just yours. This is sort of a sensitive area for everyone, but our professional responsibilities dictate 
that we address this area. Do you understand? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding). 
 
2. Do you have any reason to believe that material fraud is being committed at any level within the 
organization? 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.345 
3. Mr. CEO, one trend in fraud is that small frauds  are committed by employees with little authority, 
which means that the largest ones are usually committed with the knowledge of upper management. Do 
you understand that? (Wait for an affirmative response before proceeding.) 
 
4. Because of that, we are required to at least look at the possibility that all CEOs, including you, might 
commit significant fraud against customers, investors,  or shareholders. Do you understand our situation? 
(Wait for an affirmative response.) 
 
5. So during this audit (examination) we need to ask direct questions ab out this subject to you and your 
staff. As a matter of fact, we will at least discuss the possibility of fraud with every employee we talk with 
in connection with this audit (exa mination). Do you have any problem with that? (Wait for a negative 
response. If the CEO protests, satisfy his objections. If he cannot be satisfied, assess the risk of whether 
the CEO is attempting to obstruct the audit or examination.) 
 
6. First, let’s look at your CFO. Can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the 
company by committing fraud? 
 
7. Has the CFO ever asked you to approve any financial transaction  you thought might be improper or 
illegal?   
 
8. Do you know whether the CFO has any outside business interests that might conflict with his duties 
here? 
 
9. Does the CFO employ any friends or relatives in the company? (Look for possible conflicts or sweetheart 
deals.) 
 
10.  What information do you have about the CFO’s lifestyle? (Look for expensive homes, cars, toys, and 
habits.) 
 
11.  What is your general impression of how the CFO gets along with his staff? (Look for abuses of 
authority, etc., that would motivate employees di rectly below the CFO to participate in fraud.) 
 
12.  How do you think fraud in your company compares with others in the same industry? 
 
13.  Of course, Mr. CEO, I must ask you many of the same questions about yourself. Is there any reason 
that anyone below you might claim you are committing fraud against the company? 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.346                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
14.  I must also ask you some personal financial quest ions. Do you have any problem with this? (Wait for 
negative response.) 
 
15.  Please give me a current estimate of your personal asset s, liabilities, income, and expenses. (List) What 
percentage of your net worth is tied directly to this  company? (Look for highly leveraged individuals whose 
company holdings are a significant portion of their net worth.) 
 
16.  Are you currently experiencing any personal financial problems? (Look for lawsuits, liens, judgments, or 
other indicators.)    
 
17.  Do you have friends or relatives working for this  company? (Look for conflicts of interest.) 
 
18.  Do you have friends or relatives working for major suppliers or vendors to this company? (Look for 
conflicts of interest.) 
 
19.  Do you own any portion of a company that does business  with this organization? (Look for conflicts of 
interest.) 
 
20.  Hypothetically, if you wanted to pump up your company’s profits, what would be the easiest way to do it? 
 
21.  As I said, we will be required to ask many questions of your staff. Is there any reason why someone who 
works for you would say you are at  risk to commit significant fraud against the company or its 
shareholders? 
 
22.  Mr. CEO, this is the last question, and it should be obvious why I have to ask it. Have you committed 
fraud or other illegal acts against the company? (Do not apologize for asking the question; it’s your job.)     
 
THE CEO’S TOP STAFF 
CEOs of corporations, large and small, are busy individuals. Because they tend to be “big 
picture” people by nature, they rely heavily on their staffs—principally their personal 
assistants—to take care of details. But personal assistants do not usually become closely tied 
to the boss without a demonstrated history of loyalty and discretion. In short, if you make 
the boss’s assistant mad, your fraud-related questions are going to be interpreted in the worst 
possible light, thereby making your job much more difficult. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.347 
So the key to interviewing the CEO’s top sta ff is to approach the interviewing process 
correctly from the outset. This means laying a great deal of groundwork before asking 
sensitive questions. Start with procedural matters or some other non-sensitive topic, and ask 
the fraud-related questions toward the end of your conversation. 
 
1. Mr. Assistant, part of my job as an auditor (fraud examiner) is to assess the risk that the company’s 
books are not materially correct as a result of fraud by employees or management. I have already talked 
about these issues with your boss. He understands their importance and he is aware that, as part of the 
audit, I will be talking to everyone about the subject to some extent. Do you have any problem with this? 
(Wait for negative response.) 
 
2. Do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in general? (Icebreaker.) 
 
3. How do you think this company stacks up to others in terms of honesty of its employees and managers? 
 
4. Have you ever heard rumors in the company that someone is committing fraud, especially someone high 
up in the organization? 
 
5. Is the company in any kind of financial trouble that would motivate management to misstate the 
company’s profits? 
 
6. Do you think your coworkers are essentially honest?  
 
7. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do something you felt was not legal or ethical? 
 
8. How would you handle such a situation? (Solic it information on fraud reporting program.) 
 
9. If someone in a position of authority in the company wanted to commit fraud, what would be the easiest 
way to do it? 
 
10.  As your auditor, may I ask you to report any instances in the future of anyone asking you to do anything 
to the books and records that you feel is not right? (Solicit future cooperation.) 
 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.348                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
In the vast majority of cases the CFO is an integral part of any financial statement fraud, as 
illustrated previously. As a result, the interview with the CFO should concentrate not only 
on possible motivations to commit fraud, but also on the opportunity to do so. Since most 
CFOs are accountants, they should more readily  understand your fraud-related mission. This 
can be good or bad; good if the CFO is hone st, and bad if he isn’t. Among all financial 
personnel, the CFO is in the best position to know how to cook the books and keep it from 
being uncovered. As if that weren’t enough, many CFOs are hired directly from the firms 
that audit the company. Is there any other person more likely to be at the center of the 
fraud?  
 
1. Mr. CFO, you now know that audit standards require us to actively assess the risk that material fraud 
could be affecting the financial statements. We have ta lked with the CEO, and he  is fully aware that we 
will be asking most everyone we  speak with about the possibility of fraud or irregularities. You 
understand this, don’t you? (Wait for affirmative response.) 
 
2. Of the accounts on the company’s books, which do  you suspect might be the most vulnerable to 
manipulation, and why? 
 
3. What kind of history does the company have with fraud in general, including defalcations and employee 
thefts? (Look for signs of a weak corporate culture.) 
 
4. We know that fraud usually exists to some extent—even if it is small—in most companies. How do you 
think your company compares to others? 
 
5. What is your overall impression of the company’s ethics and corporate culture? 
 
6. During our assessment of risk of fraud in your company, are there any specific ar eas you’d like to discuss 
with us? 
 
7. Is there any reason that anyone in  the company might say that management had a motive to misstate the 
financials? 
 
8. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do  anything with the books that you thought was 
questionable, unethical, or illegal?  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.349 
9. Are you involved in the personal finances of the CEO?  If so, is there anything about them that might 
make you think he is under personal financial pressure? 
 
10. Do either the CEO’s lifestyle or habits give you any reason to think he may be living beyond his means? 
 
11. Has anyone in a position of authority ever asked that you withhold in formation from the auditors, alter 
documents, or make fictitious en tries in the books and records? 
 
12.  Is there anything about your own background or finances that would cause someone to suspect that you 
had a motive for committing fraud? 
 
13.  Because of your importance as CF O, I must ask you one final question: Have you, yourself, committed 
fraud or illegal acts against this company? (Remember—don’t apologize.) 
 
THE ACCOUNTING STAFF 
If a financial statement fraud has been ordered by the CFO, he will either do the actual dirty 
work himself or get his staff to do it. In some cases, the staff will understand the big picture, 
but in most situations, the employee is told only what he needs to know. It is uncommon for 
a CFO to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cooking the books.  
 
As a result, the examiner generally must complete his audit work before beginning the 
interviews of the accounting staff. This will allow specific transactions to be discussed with 
the people who actually entered them into the company’s records. For example, all thorough 
audits will examine the major journal entries. Frequently, these journal entries will be ordered 
by the CFO, but actually entered by a staff member. There would generally be no record of 
the CFO requesting the entry, so this fact must be established through interviews.  
 
Interviews of the accounting staff will allow sufficient examination of procedures and 
controls over assets. After these questions are answered, you can generally pursue the line of 
inquiry suggested above for the CEO’s assistant. 
 
It should be noted that there are similarities and differences in the questions asked of the 
CEO, the CFO, and their staffs. In the case of the CEO and the CFO, both were specifically 
asked if they had committed fraud against the company, albeit in a nice way. The staffers 
were not asked that specific question.  
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.350                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The reasoning is this: significant financial statement fraud, as we have stated, generally 
originates with one or both of these two executives. Staffers have less motivation to engage 
in financial statement fraud, and are, therefore, at less risk to do so. They are also less likely 
to have the financial authority to enter transactions into the books without higher approval.  
 
So absent any specific information to the contrary, asking the employees point blank if they 
have committed fraud is less likely to produce information and more likely to offend them. 
But with the CFO and the CEO, asking the direct question will add measurably to the 
prevention of fraud. There are few defenses to not asking the question, other than the 
specter of embarrassing the executives you are auditing. That will, of course, sound pretty 
weak in a court of law where you are fighting for your professional life.  
 
 



:


interview in fraudul financi statement case
for indepth interview techniqu pleas refer to the interview theori and
applic chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi statement fraud doe not occur in an isol environ peopl in organ
who have both motiv and opportun ar the prime candid to commit fraudul
misstat in the overwhelm major of situat two kei manag particip
activ in the fraud the chief execut offic and the chief financi offic other
financi statement fraud financi transact
1342 2011 fraud examin manual
becom involv larg out of necess those who ar not directli involv most often
ar not awar that anyth is wrong
investig of financi statement fraud ar uniqu in that thei almost alwai involv
interview the execut manag of the organ to detect or deter financi
statement fraud it is absolut necessari that top manag be interview by a
compet and experienc fraud examin who possess the abil to solicit honest
answer to tough but vital question about whether anyon ha tamper with the book
interview techniqu
situat in which account ar tempt to misstat financi statement most often
involv pressur connect with financi perform the follow is a fictiti
convers between upper manag of a corpor the exampl show how the
pressur to commit financi statement fraud can greatli influenc account personnel
cfo to ceo boss it look like we will not have a good year financi we told
the sharehold or bank that our earn would be 4 a share and it look like well
be veri lucki to even make 3
ceo well what ar we go to do about it if we miss the earn project or
dont get the loan our goos will be cook well both lose our job we must get those
earn up to where thei should be
cfo what do you mean
ceo what i mean is that it is your job to bring in the number your go to have
to find a wai to get them up im sure we can probabl make up the differ next year
but for now you get our earningsassetsequ up howev you have to all financi
statement ar essenti estim anyhow so you figur out how to estim the number
more in our favor i dont know how to do it and i dont want you to tell me but get it
done
the cfo face a dilemma cook the book or lose hi job the action of the cfo ar veri
hard to predict if he step over the edg chanc ar he will need to enlist the aid of
account and cleric personnel to carri out the detail even if these employe do not
know what thei ar actual do for exampl the cfo might tell the chief account to
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1343
book certain receiv and incom which would produc the need effectpump up
the equiti such a scheme might onli be appar to the real insid
in order to detect financi statement fraud through interview manag and kei
support staff must be interview fraud examin and auditor collect refer to as
examin must consid mani import ant issu when conduct interview on
import issu examin should keep in mind when conduct interview is that there is
gener no liabil in ask question in which thei have a legitim interest no matter
how insult the question might be to the respond examin therefor have the
legal right to be fearless in ask question as long as the question ar ask privat and
under reason circumst thi legal right doesnt extend to accusationsonli to
question ar you still cook the book is an accus wherea ar you cook
the book is a question it is import to know the differ and to frame question
accordingli
examin should also be sure to interview onli on person at a time group of peopl
should not be interview togeth becaus member tend to influenc each other the
interview should alwai be conduct under privat condit which permit the
respond to answer candidli
it is import that examin aim to be nonthreaten in their interview approach the
less threaten the interview appear the less reluct the respond will be to answer
question an interview should not be judgment or show surpris or disgust such action
can inhibit the flow of inform
examin should warm up respond thoroughli befor ask sensit question it is
best to obtain all of the procedur inform and inform pertain to intern
control prior to discuss fraud fraud should usual be the last thing cover in an
interview
in order to reduc the possibl of offend respond examin can explain the natur
of their interest befor ask sensit question for exampl an examin can sai as you
know as an auditor i am requir to activ look for fraud thi mean i must ask you some direct
question about the subject do you understand then after obtain a posit respons the
examin can proce to ask question about fraud it is best to ask the least difficult
question first
financi statement fraud financi transact
1344 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth approach examin can take to make tough interview question more palat is
to phrase them hypothet especi dure the begin of the interview for exampl
rather than ask a chief financi offic have you commit fraud an examin can
sai to the execut suppos someon in the po sition of chief financi offic decid to
pump up the financi how would he do it the latter question is far more like to illicit
specif inform than the former later in the interview the execut should be ask
specif if he ha commit the fraud the examin can sai someth along the line of
my profession respons requir me to ask you on particularli sensit direct
question have you commit fraud or other illeg act against the compani the vast
major of respond will answer no to such a question without hesit whether
thei have or not howev simpli ask the question place the examin in a much more
favor posit if attack profession for not detect a fraud
the interview
fraud examin and auditor should ask question design to elicit the most specif
inform possibl in a profession manner
the chief execut offic
gener the ceo should be interview first in ani proactiv or reactiv fraud situat
there ar sever good reason for thi approach first of all the auditor or fraud examin
must have a thorough understand with manag as to what hi respons in thi
area ar second it is unwis to conduct sensit inquiri within ani organ without
first advis the ceo if he learn from some other sourc that you ar make discreet
fraudrel inquiri without tell him he is more like to misunderstand your object
and take the inquiri as a person affront third if there is ani signific cook of the
book the ceo is almost alwai involv the fraudrel question you should ask in
connect with a regular audit should includ at a minimum the follow note how the
question ar for set up purpos
1 mr ceo as you know we ar requir to assess the risk that materi fraud exist in everi compani
not just your thi is sort of a sensit area for everyon but our profession respons dictat
that we address thi area do you understand wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
2 do you have ani reason to believ that materi fraud is be commit at ani level within the
organ
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1345
3 mr ceo on trend in fraud is that small fraud ar commit by employe with littl author
which mean that the largest on ar usual commit with the knowledg of upper manag do
you understand that wait for an affirm respons befor proceed
4 becaus of that we ar requir to at least look at the possibl that all ceo includ you might
commit signific fraud against custom investor or sharehold do you understand our situat
wait for an affirm respons
5 so dure thi audit examin we need to ask direct question ab out thi subject to you and your
staff as a matter of fact we will at least discuss the possibl of fraud with everi employe we talk with
in connect with thi audit exa minat do you have ani problem with that wait for a neg
respons if the ceo protest satisfi hi object if he cannot be satisfi assess the risk of whether
the ceo is attempt to obstruct the audit or examin
6 first let look at your cfo can you think of a reason he might have to get back at you or the
compani by commit fraud
7 ha the cfo ever ask you to approv ani financi transact you thought might be improp or
illeg
8 do you know whether the cfo ha ani outsid busi interest that might conflict with hi duti
here
9 doe the cfo emploi ani friend or rel in the compani look for possibl conflict or sweetheart
deal
10 what inform do you have about the cfo lifestyl look for expens home car toi and
habit
11 what is your gener impress of how the cfo get along with hi staff look for abus of
author etc that would motiv employe di rectli below the cfo to particip in fraud
12 how do you think fraud in your compani compar with other in the same industri
13 of cours mr ceo i must ask you mani of the same question about yourself is there ani reason
that anyon below you might claim you ar commit fraud against the compani
financi statement fraud financi transact
1346 2011 fraud examin manual
14 i must also ask you some person financi quest ion do you have ani problem with thi wait for
neg respons
15 pleas give me a current estim of your person asset s liabil incom and expens list what
percentag of your net worth is ti directli to thi compani look for highli leverag individu whose
compani hold ar a signific portion of their net worth
16 ar you current experienc ani person financi problem look for lawsuit lien judgment or
other indic
17 do you have friend or rel work for thi compani look for conflict of interest
18 do you have friend or rel work for major supplier or vendor to thi compani look for
conflict of interest
19 do you own ani portion of a compani that doe busi with thi organ look for conflict of
interest
20 hypothet if you want to pump up your compani profit what would be the easiest wai to do it
21 as i said we will be requir to ask mani question of your staff is there ani reason why someon who
work for you would sai you ar at risk to commit signific fraud against the compani or it
sharehold
22 mr ceo thi is the last question and it should be obviou why i have to ask it have you commit
fraud or other illeg act against the compani do not apolog for ask the question it your job
the ceo top staff
ceo of corpor larg and small ar busi individu becaus thei tend to be big
pictur peopl by natur thei reli heavili on their staffsprincip their person
assistantsto take care of detail but person assist do not usual becom close ti
to the boss without a demonstr histori of loyalti and discret in short if you make
the bosss assist mad your fraudrel question ar go to be interpret in the worst
possibl light therebi make your job much more difficult
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1347
so the kei to interview the ceo top sta ff is to approach the interview process
correctli from the outset thi mean lai a great deal of groundwork befor ask
sensit question start with procedur matter or some other nonsensit topic and ask
the fraudrel question toward the end of your convers
1 mr assist part of my job as an auditor fraud examin is to assess the risk that the compani
book ar not materi correct as a result of fraud by employe or manag i have alreadi talk
about these issu with your boss he understand their import and he is awar that as part of the
audit i will be talk to everyon about the subject to some extent do you have ani problem with thi
wait for neg respons
2 do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in gener icebreak
3 how do you think thi compani stack up to other in term of honesti of it employe and manag
4 have you ever heard rumor in the compani that someon is commit fraud especi someon high
up in the organ
5 is the compani in ani kind of financi troubl that would motiv manag to misstat the
compani profit
6 do you think your cowork ar essenti honest
7 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do someth you felt wa not legal or ethic
8 how would you handl such a situat solic it inform on fraud report program
9 if someon in a posit of author in the compani want to commit fraud what would be the easiest
wai to do it
10 as your auditor mai i ask you to report ani instanc in the futur of anyon ask you to do anyth
to the book and record that you feel is not right solicit futur cooper
financi statement fraud financi transact
1348 2011 fraud examin manual
the chief financi offic
in the vast major of case the cfo is an integr part of ani financi statement fraud as
illustr previous as a result the interview with the cfo should concentr not onli
on possibl motiv to commit fraud but also on the opportun to do so sinc most
cfo ar account thei should more readili understand your fraudrel mission thi
can be good or bad good if the cfo is hone st and bad if he isnt among all financi
personnel the cfo is in the best posit to know how to cook the book and keep it from
be uncov as if that werent enough mani cfo ar hire directli from the firm
that audit the compani is there ani other person more like to be at the center of the
fraud
1 mr cfo you now know that audit standard requir us to activ assess the risk that materi fraud
could be affect the financi statement we have ta lked with the ceo and he is fulli awar that we
will be ask most everyon we speak with about the possibl of fraud or irregular you
understand thi dont you wait for affirm respons
2 of the account on the compani book which do you suspect might be the most vulner to
manipul and why
3 what kind of histori doe the compani have with fraud in gener includ defalc and employe
theft look for sign of a weak corpor cultur
4 we know that fraud usual exist to some extenteven if it is smallin most compani how do you
think your compani compar to other
5 what is your overal impress of the compani ethic and corpor cultur
6 dure our assess of risk of fraud in your compani ar there ani specif ar ea youd like to discuss
with us
7 is there ani reason that anyon in the compani might sai that manag had a motiv to misstat the
financi
8 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do anyth with the book that you thought wa
question uneth or illeg
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1349
9 ar you involv in the person financ of the ceo if so is there anyth about them that might
make you think he is under person financi pressur
10 do either the ceo lifestyl or habit give you ani reason to think he mai be live beyond hi mean
11 ha anyon in a posit of author ever ask that you withhold in format from the auditor alter
document or make fictiti en tri in the book and record
12 is there anyth about your own background or financ that would caus someon to suspect that you
had a motiv for commit fraud
13 becaus of your import as cf o i must ask you on final question have you yourself commit
fraud or illeg act against thi compani rememberdont apolog
the account staff
if a financi statement fraud ha been order by the cfo he will either do the actual dirti
work himself or get hi staff to do it in some case the staff will understand the big pictur
but in most situat the employe is told onli what he need to know it is uncommon for
a cfo to share with a lower staff person the fact that he is cook the book
as a result the examin gener must complet hi audit work befor begin the
interview of the account staff thi will allow specif transact to be discuss with
the peopl who actual enter them into the compani record for exampl all thorough
audit will examin the major journal entri frequent these journal entri will be order
by the cfo but actual enter by a staff member there would gener be no record of
the cfo request the entri so thi fact must be establish through interview
interview of the account staff will allow suffici examin of procedur and
control over asset after these question ar answer you can gener pursu the line of
inquiri suggest abov for the ceo assist
it should be note that there ar similar and differ in the question ask of the
ceo the cfo and their staff in the case of the ceo and the cfo both were specif
ask if thei had commit fraud against the compani albeit in a nice wai the staffer
were not ask that specif question
financi statement fraud financi transact
1350 2011 fraud examin manual
the reason is thi signific financi statement fraud as we have state gener
origin with on or both of these two execut staffer have less motiv to engag
in financi statement fraud and ar therefor at less risk to do so thei ar also less like
to have the financi author to enter transact into the book without higher approv
so absent ani specif inform to the contrari ask the employe point blank if thei
have commit fraud is less like to produc inform and more like to offend them
but with the cfo and the ceo ask the direct question will add measur to the
prevent of fraud there ar few defens to not ask the question other than the
specter of embarrass the execut you ar audit that will of cours sound pretti
weak in a court of law where you ar fight for your profession life
