2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases/The Interview/THE CEO’S TOP STAFF


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


THE CEO’S TOP STAFF 
CEOs of corporations, large and small, are busy individuals. Because they tend to be “big 
picture” people by nature, they rely heavily on their staffs—principally their personal 
assistants—to take care of details. But personal assistants do not usually become closely tied 
to the boss without a demonstrated history of loyalty and discretion. In short, if you make 
the boss’s assistant mad, your fraud-related questions are going to be interpreted in the worst 
possible light, thereby making your job much more difficult. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.347 
So the key to interviewing the CEO’s top sta ff is to approach the interviewing process 
correctly from the outset. This means laying a great deal of groundwork before asking 
sensitive questions. Start with procedural matters or some other non-sensitive topic, and ask 
the fraud-related questions toward the end of your conversation. 
 
1. Mr. Assistant, part of my job as an auditor (fraud examiner) is to assess the risk that the company’s 
books are not materially correct as a result of fraud by employees or management. I have already talked 
about these issues with your boss. He understands their importance and he is aware that, as part of the 
audit, I will be talking to everyone about the subject to some extent. Do you have any problem with this? 
(Wait for negative response.) 
 
2. Do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in general? (Icebreaker.) 
 
3. How do you think this company stacks up to others in terms of honesty of its employees and managers? 
 
4. Have you ever heard rumors in the company that someone is committing fraud, especially someone high 
up in the organization? 
 
5. Is the company in any kind of financial trouble that would motivate management to misstate the 
company’s profits? 
 
6. Do you think your coworkers are essentially honest?  
 
7. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do something you felt was not legal or ethical? 
 
8. How would you handle such a situation? (Solic it information on fraud reporting program.) 
 
9. If someone in a position of authority in the company wanted to commit fraud, what would be the easiest 
way to do it? 
 
10.  As your auditor, may I ask you to report any instances in the future of anyone asking you to do anything 
to the books and records that you feel is not right? (Solicit future cooperation.) 
 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.348                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


the ceo top staff
ceo of corpor larg and small ar busi individu becaus thei tend to be big
pictur peopl by natur thei reli heavili on their staffsprincip their person
assistantsto take care of detail but person assist do not usual becom close ti
to the boss without a demonstr histori of loyalti and discret in short if you make
the bosss assist mad your fraudrel question ar go to be interpret in the worst
possibl light therebi make your job much more difficult
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1347
so the kei to interview the ceo top sta ff is to approach the interview process
correctli from the outset thi mean lai a great deal of groundwork befor ask
sensit question start with procedur matter or some other nonsensit topic and ask
the fraudrel question toward the end of your convers
1 mr assist part of my job as an auditor fraud examin is to assess the risk that the compani
book ar not materi correct as a result of fraud by employe or manag i have alreadi talk
about these issu with your boss he understand their import and he is awar that as part of the
audit i will be talk to everyon about the subject to some extent do you have ani problem with thi
wait for neg respons
2 do you think fraud is a problem for bu siness in gener icebreak
3 how do you think thi compani stack up to other in term of honesti of it employe and manag
4 have you ever heard rumor in the compani that someon is commit fraud especi someon high
up in the organ
5 is the compani in ani kind of financi troubl that would motiv manag to misstat the
compani profit
6 do you think your cowork ar essenti honest
7 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do someth you felt wa not legal or ethic
8 how would you handl such a situat solic it inform on fraud report program
9 if someon in a posit of author in the compani want to commit fraud what would be the easiest
wai to do it
10 as your auditor mai i ask you to report ani instanc in the futur of anyon ask you to do anyth
to the book and record that you feel is not right solicit futur cooper
financi statement fraud financi transact
1348 2011 fraud examin manual
