2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Prevention of Financial Statement Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Prevention of Financial Statement Fraud 
Prevention and deterrence of financial statement fraud consists of those actions taken to 
discourage the perpetration of fraud and limit the exposure, if fraud does occur.  
 
Internal Auditors 
Internal auditors are responsible for helping to deter fraud by examining and evaluating the 
adequacy and the effectiveness of controls, commensurate with the extent of the potential 
exposure in the various segments of an entity’s operations. The internal auditing standards 
state that the principal mechanism for deterring fraud is internal control. Primary 
responsibility for establishing and maintaining internal control rests with management. The 
Treadway Commission addresses this issue by recommending that internal audit departments 
or staffs have not only the support of top management, but also the necessary resources 
available to carry out their mission. The internal auditors’ responsibility is to aid management 
in the deterrence of fraud by evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of the company’s 
internal control system, as well as the company’s potential exposure to fraud, with particular 
consideration given to the five elements of internal control laid out by COSO.  
 
Management  
It is management’s respo nsibility to set the ethical tone of the organization. As with other 
types of occupational fraud and abuse, reducing the three factors that contribute to fraud 
will greatly help in the prevention of financial statement fraud. Reducing existing pressures 
to commit fraud, removing potential opportunities to commit fraud, and relieving possible 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.351 
rationalizations for committing fraud will greatly aid in the prevention of financial statement 
fraud. 
 
Reduce the Situational Pressures that Encourage Financial Statement Fraud 
• Avoid setting unachievable financial goals. 
• Eliminate external pressures that might tempt accounting personnel to prepare 
fraudulent financial statements. 
• Remove operational obstacles that block effective financial performance, such as 
working capital restraints, excess production volume, or inventory restraints. 
• Establish clear and uniform accounting procedures that do not contain exception 
clauses. 
 
Reduce the Opportunity to Commit Fraud 
• Maintain accurate and complete internal accounting records. 
• Carefully monitor the business transactions and interpersonal relationships of suppliers, 
buyers, purchasing agents, sales representatives, and others who interface in the 
transactions between financial units. 
• Establish a physical security system to secure company assets, including finished goods, 
cash, capital equipment, tools, and other valuable items. 
• Divide important functions between employees, separating total control of one area. 
• Maintain accurate personnel records, including background checks (where permitted by 
law) on new employees. 
• Encourage strong supervisory and leadership relationships within groups to ensure 
enforcement of accounting procedures. 
 
Reduce the Rationalization of Fraud — Strengthen Employee Personal Integrity  
• Managers should set an example by promot ing honesty in the accounting area. It is 
important that management practice what it preaches. Dishonest acts by management, 
even if they are directed at someone outside of the organization, create a dishonest 
environment that can spread to other business activities and other employees, both 
internal and external. 
• Honest and dishonest behavior should be defined in company policies. Organizational 
accounting policies should clear up any gray areas in accounting procedures. 
• The consequences of violating the rules, including the punishment of violators, should 
be clear. 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.401 



:


prevent of financi statement fraud
prevent and deterr of financi statement fraud consist of those action taken to
discourag the perpetr of fraud and limit the exposur if fraud doe occur
intern auditor
intern auditor ar respons for help to deter fraud by examin and evalu the
adequaci and the effect of control commensur with the extent of the potenti
exposur in the variou segment of an entiti oper the intern audit standard
state that the princip mechan for deter fraud is intern control primari
respons for establish and maintain intern control rest with manag the
treadwai commiss address thi issu by recommend that intern audit depart
or staff have not onli the support of top manag but also the necessari resourc
avail to carri out their mission the intern auditor respons is to aid manag
in the deterr of fraud by evalu the adequaci and effect of the compani
intern control system as well as the compani potenti exposur to fraud with particular
consider given to the five element of intern control laid out by coso
manag
it is manag respo nsibil to set the ethic tone of the organ as with other
type of occup fraud and abus reduc the three factor that contribut to fraud
will greatli help in the prevent of financi statement fraud reduc exist pressur
to commit fraud remov potenti opportun to commit fraud and reliev possibl
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1351
ration for commit fraud will greatli aid in the prevent of financi statement
fraud
reduc the situat pressur that encourag financi statement fraud
avoid set unachiev financi goal
elimin extern pressur that might tempt account personnel to prepar
fraudul financi statement
remov oper obstacl that block effect financi perform such as
work capit restraint excess product volum or inventori restraint
establish clear and uniform account procedur that do not contain except
claus
reduc the opportun to commit fraud
maintain accur and complet intern account record
carefulli monitor the busi transact and interperson relationship of supplier
buyer purchas agent sale repres and other who interfac in the
transact between financi unit
establish a physic secur system to secur compani asset includ finish good
cash capit equip tool and other valuabl item
divid import function between employe separ total control of on area
maintain accur personnel record includ background check where permit by
law on new employe
encourag strong supervisori and leadership relationship within group to ensur
enforc of account procedur
reduc the ration of fraud strengthen employe person integr
manag should set an exampl by promot ing honesti in the account area it is
import that manag practic what it preach dishonest act by manag
even if thei ar direct at someon outsid of the organ creat a dishonest
environ that can spread to other busi activ and other employe both
intern and extern
honest and dishonest behavior should be defin in compani polici organiz
account polici should clear up ani grai area in account procedur
the consequ of violat the rule includ the punish of violat should
be clear
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1401
