2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME 
 
Most criminologists have adopted the distinction first made by Marshall B. Clinard (a 
recipient of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award) and Richard 
Quinney between occupational crime  and organizational crime. Organizational crime is that which 
is committed by businesses, particularly corporations, and government. Occupational crime 
involves offenses against the law by individuals in the course of their occupation. An  
anti-trust offense would be an organizational crime; accepting or offering bribes is an 
occupational offense. 
 
Organizational crime occurs in the context of  complex relationships and expectations among 
boards of directors, executives, and managers on the one hand, and among parent 
corporations, corporate divisions, and subsidiaries on the other. White-collar crime is 
distinguished from lower socioeconomic crimes in terms of the structure of the violation 
and the fact that administrative and civil penalties are more likely to be used as punishment 
than are criminal penalties. 
 
While corporations cannot be jailed, they may be confined. Most corporate lawbreakers are 
handled by government regulatory agencies like the Federal Trade Commission, the 
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Food and Drug Administration. Enforcement 
measures might include warning letters, consent agreements or decrees not to repeat the 
violation; orders of regulatory agencies to  compel compliance, seizure, or recall of  
goods; administrative or civil monetary penalties; and court injunctions to refrain from 
further violations. 
 
Corporate crime is certainly not limited to the United States. Clinard and Yeager say it 
appears to be extensive in Europe, Japan, Australia, and other areas. According to Delmas-
 Marty, French multinationals violate the law in many ways. They utilize both legal and illegal 
means in tax evasion. They may transfer profits from one subsidiary to another located in a 
country that has a more lenient tax system or presents a tax haven, like Switzerland. 
According to Cosson, French manufacturing corporations also falsify their bookkeeping to 
avoid payment of industrial and commercial taxes. 
 
In Japan, the Diet (legislature) has passed a law for the punishment of crimes “relating to 
environmental pollution that adversely affects the health of persons.” Under this law, 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.502   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
intentional or negligent emission by industries of a substance that causes danger to human 
life or health is to be punished with imprisonment or fines. 
 
The Swiss banking system has often been accused of offering a hiding place for stolen or 
looted money, providing a screen for stock manipulations and shady promoters, and helping 
tax evaders to conceal both income and assets. Deposits in Swiss banks are often laundered 
to obscure their illegal origins, and then the money is made legal through new commercial 
transactions and is therefore concealed from tax authorities. 
 
 



:


organiz crime
most criminologist have adopt the distinct first made by marshal b clinard a
recipi of the associ of certifi fraud examin cressei award and richard
quinnei between occup crime and organiz crime organiz crime is that which
is commit by busi particularli corpor and govern occup crime
involv offens against the law by individu in the cours of their occup an
antitrust offens would be an organiz crime accept or offer bribe is an
occup offens
organiz crime occur in the context of complex relationship and expect among
board of director execut and manag on the on hand and among parent
corpor corpor divis and subsidiari on the other whitecollar crime is
distinguish from lower socioeconom crime in term of the structur of the violat
and the fact that administr and civil penalti ar more like to be us as punish
than ar crimin penalti
while corpor cannot be jail thei mai be confin most corpor lawbreak ar
handl by govern regulatori agenc like the feder trade commiss the
environment protect agenc and the food and drug administr enforc
measur might includ warn letter consent agreement or decre not to repeat the
violat order of regulatori agenc to compel complianc seizur or recal of
good administr or civil monetari penalti and court injunct to refrain from
further violat
corpor crime is certainli not limit to the unit state clinard and yeager sai it
appear to be extens in europ japan australia and other area accord to delma
marti french multin violat the law in mani wai thei util both legal and illeg
mean in tax evas thei mai transfer profit from on subsidiari to anoth locat in a
countri that ha a more lenient tax system or present a tax haven like switzerland
accord to cosson french manufactur corpor also falsifi their bookkeep to
avoid payment of industri and commerci tax
in japan the diet legislatur ha pass a law for the punish of crime relat to
environment pollut that advers affect the health of person under thi law
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4502 2011 fraud examin manual
intent or neglig emiss by industri of a substanc that caus danger to human
life or health is to be punish with imprison or fine
the swiss bank system ha often been accus of offer a hide place for stolen or
loot monei provid a screen for stock manipul and shadi promot and help
tax evad to conceal both incom and asset deposit in swiss bank ar often launder
to obscur their illeg origin and then the monei is made legal through new commerci
transact and is therefor conceal from tax author
