2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Opportunities for Unlawful Organizational Behavior/Organizational Structure


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Organizational Structure 
Complex companies provide a structure that can foster misbehavior. They provide many 
settings where misconduct is possible. They isolate those settings in departments and in 
locations around a city, the country, or the world. The isolation, in turn, means that 
information about what one part of a company is doing may be unknown in another part. 
All this reduces the risk that misbehavior will be detected and punished. The larger a 
company grows, the more specialized its subunits tend to become. An internally diversified 
company may have few employees who fully understand the detailed workings. 
 
Specialized departments in a large firm compete for resources not only with other firms,  
but with departments in their own firm. The need to outperform both other businesses and 
internal units can generate sufficient pressure to lead to misconduct. Vaughan notes that 
departments often have survival concerns that conflict with the larger interests of an 
organization. When given a chance to make decisions, she writes, lower-level managers will 
tend to act not in the interest of the firm, but in the interests of their departments. 
Specialization also hides illegal activities, especially where a firm’s tasks are kept separate and 
unrelated. Employees cannot garner knowledge about all the particulars of how a firm 
works. This protects a company from the effects of personnel turnover and leaks of 
                                                 
6Diane Vaughan, The Challenger Launch Decision:  Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA. 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
information because no one can offer much more than a piece of the jigsaw puzzle  
that makes up the company picture. The same secrecy, however, raises the chances  
for misconduct. 
 
Companies spell out rules in a common language to decide how tasks will be performed and 
to create common bonds that will facilitate decision making. But a company’s ability to 
coordinate all its activities varies considerably. Vaughan writes that organizational growth 
naturally leads to a progressive loss of control over departments. Executives cannot hope to 
keep track of all the units in a huge company and must rely on subordinates to carry out 
policy. Vaughan states that when the distance between top executives and subordinate units 
grows to a sufficient level, “authority leakage”  results. Such leakage means the company has 
become too unwieldy for an executive to enforce rules at all levels. “The organization, in 
short,” Vaughan writes, “can diversify beyond the capability of those at the top to master it.” 
 
Such leakage allows subsidiaries, company researchers, accountants, or other departments to 
engage in misconduct without any assurance that internal controls will check the behavior. 
In some cases, as with computer crime, detecting misconduct might be beyond the ability of 
most employees. Conversely, authority leakage and specialization can also lead an 
organization to comply with societal rules even when the organizational pressures lean 
toward misconduct. 
 
Does the existence of authority imply a loss of company control? While a company that 
cannot steer its employees’ behavior might be viewed as irrational or incompetent, the ability 
to control information flow from top to bottom may not be possible. Research and theory 
suggest, to the contrary, that information is processed selectively through a company in ways 
that tend to protect the interests of departments and to promote efficiency.  
 
Sometimes censorship of information promotes a company’s interests. In other cases, “need 
to know” policies or ignorance of rules that  are irrelevant to a department leads to 
inefficiencies. All these tendencies restrict information flow and create opportunities for one 
unit in a company to act outside the knowledge of other units. Censorship policies may 
originate in any part of a company and hide matters throughout the organization.  
The tiered structure of most organizations obscures personal responsibility and tends to 
spread it throughout the company. Thus, determining where a decision to engage in 
misconduct originated can be difficult. Author John E. Conklin put it this way: “The 
delegation of responsibility and unwritten orders keep those at the top of the corporate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.507  
structure remote from the consequences of their decisions and orders, much as the heads of 
organized crime families remain ‘untouchable’ by law.” 
 
 



:


organiz structur
complex compani provid a structur that can foster misbehavior thei provid mani
set where misconduct is possibl thei isol those set in depart and in
locat around a citi the countri or the world the isol in turn mean that
inform about what on part of a compani is do mai be unknown in anoth part
all thi reduc the risk that misbehavior will be detect and punish the larger a
compani grow the more special it subunit tend to becom an intern diversifi
compani mai have few employe who fulli understand the detail work
special depart in a larg firm compet for resourc not onli with other firm
but with depart in their own firm the need to outperform both other busi and
intern unit can gener suffici pressur to lead to misconduct vaughan note that
depart often have surviv concern that conflict with the larger interest of an
organ when given a chanc to make decis she write lowerlevel manag will
tend to act not in the interest of the firm but in the interest of their depart
special also hide illeg activ especi where a firm task ar kept separ and
unrel employe cannot garner knowledg about all the particular of how a firm
work thi protect a compani from the effect of personnel turnov and leak of
6dian vaughan the challeng launch decis riski technolog cultur and devianc at nasa
chicago univers of chicago press 1996
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4506 2011 fraud examin manual
inform becaus no on can offer much more than a piec of the jigsaw puzzl
that make up the compani pictur the same secreci howev rais the chanc
for misconduct
compani spell out rule in a common languag to decid how task will be perform and
to creat common bond that will facilit decis make but a compani abil to
coordin all it activ vari consider vaughan write that organiz growth
natur lead to a progress loss of control over depart execut cannot hope to
keep track of all the unit in a huge compani and must reli on subordin to carri out
polici vaughan state that when the distanc between top execut and subordin unit
grow to a suffici level author leakag result such leakag mean the compani ha
becom too unwieldi for an execut to enforc rule at all level the organ in
short vaughan write can diversifi beyond the capabl of those at the top to master it
such leakag allow subsidiari compani research account or other depart to
engag in misconduct without ani assur that intern control will check the behavior
in some case as with comput crime detect misconduct might be beyond the abil of
most employe convers author leakag and special can also lead an
organ to compli with societ rule even when the organiz pressur lean
toward misconduct
doe the exist of author impli a loss of compani control while a compani that
cannot steer it employe behavior might be view as irrat or incompet the abil
to control inform flow from top to bottom mai not be possibl research and theori
suggest to the contrari that inform is process select through a compani in wai
that tend to protect the interest of depart and to promot effici
sometim censorship of inform promot a compani interest in other case need
to know polici or ignor of rule that ar irrelev to a depart lead to
ineffici all these tendenc restrict inform flow and creat opportun for on
unit in a compani to act outsid the knowledg of other unit censorship polici mai
origin in ani part of a compani and hide matter throughout the organ
the tier structur of most organ obscur person respons and tend to
spread it throughout the compani thu determin where a decis to engag in
misconduct origin can be difficult author john e conklin put it thi wai the
deleg of respons and unwritten order keep those at the top of the corpor
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4507
structur remot from the consequ of their decis and order much as the head of
organ crime famili remain untouch by law
