2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Register Disbursement Schemes/Concealing Register Disbursement Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Concealing Register Disbursement Schemes 
As has already been discussed, two things happen when a false refund or void is entered into 
the register. The first is that the employee committing the fraud removes cash from the 
register, and the second is that the item allegedly being returned is debited back into the 
perpetual inventory. Of course, there really is no merchandise being returned. This leads to 
inventory shrinkage, a situation in which there is less inventory actually on hand than the 
perpetual inventory records reflect. A certain amount of shrinkage is expected in any retail 
industry, but too much of it raises concerns of fraud. It is therefore in the perpetrator’s best 
interests to conceal the appearance of shrinkage on the books.  
 
Inventory is essentially accounted for by a two-step process. The first part of the process is 
the perpetual inventory, which is a running tabulation of how much inventory should be on 
hand. When a sale of merchandise is made, the perpetual inventory is credited to remove this 
merchandise from the records. The amount of merchandise that should be on hand is 
reduced. (Conversely, when merchandise is returned the perpetual inventory is debited.) 
Periodically, someone from the company takes a physical count of the inventory, going 
through the stockroom or warehouse and counting the amount of inventory that is actually on 
hand. The two figures are then compared to see if there is a discrepancy between the 
perpetual inventory (what should be on hand) and the physical inventory (what is on hand). 
 
In register disbursement schemes, shrinkage is often concealed by overstating inventory 
during the physical count, especially if taking inventory is one of the perpetrator’s duties. 
The perpetrator simply overstates the amount of inventory on hand so it matches the 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.508                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
perpetual inventory. For a more detailed analysis of methods used to conceal inventory 
shrinkage, please see the Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 



:


conceal regist disburs scheme
as ha alreadi been discuss two thing happen when a fals refund or void is enter into
the regist the first is that the employe commit the fraud remov cash from the
regist and the second is that the item allegedli be return is debit back into the
perpetu inventori of cours there realli is no merchandis be return thi lead to
inventori shrinkag a situat in which there is less inventori actual on hand than the
perpetu inventori record reflect a certain amount of shrinkag is expect in ani retail
industri but too much of it rais concern of fraud it is therefor in the perpetr best
interest to conceal the appear of shrinkag on the book
inventori is essenti account for by a twostep process the first part of the process is
the perpetu inventori which is a run tabul of how much inventori should be on
hand when a sale of merchandis is made the perpetu inventori is credit to remov thi
merchandis from the record the amount of merchandis that should be on hand is
reduc convers when merchandis is return the perpetu inventori is debit
period someon from the compani take a physic count of the inventori go
through the stockroom or warehous and count the amount of inventori that is actual on
hand the two figur ar then compar to see if there is a discrep between the
perpetu inventori what should be on hand and the physic inventori what is on hand
in regist disburs scheme shrinkag is often conceal by overst inventori
dure the physic count especi if take inventori is on of the perpetr duti
the perpetr simpli overst the amount of inventori on hand so it match the
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1508 2011 fraud examin manual
perpetu inventori for a more detail analysi of method us to conceal inventori
shrinkag pleas see the inventori and other asset section
