2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Erasable Ink


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Erasable Ink 
When the perpetrator prepares the check that is to be altered, the schemes tend to be a bit 
more sophisticated. The reason for this is obvious:  If the perpetrator is able to prepare the 
check himself, he can prepare it with the thought of how the payee designation will be 
changed. One of the most common ways to prepare a check for alteration is to write or type 
the payee’s name (and possibly the amount) in erasable ink. After an authorized maker signs 
the check, the perpetrator retrieves the check, erases the payee’s name, and inserts his own. 
In some cases, employees even obtain signatures on checks written in pencil. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A bookkeeper typed out small checks to a local supplier and had the owner of the company 
sign them. The bookkeeper then used her erasing typewriter to lift the payee designation and 
amount from the check. She entered her own name as the payee and raised the amount 
precipitously. For instance, the owner might si gn a $10 check that later became a $10,000 
check. These checks were entered in the disbursements journal as payments for aggregate 
inventory to the company’s largest supplier, who received several large checks each month. 
The bookkeeper stole over $300,000 fr om her employer in this scheme.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.523 
Where a proper separation of duties is in place, a person who prepares a check should not be 
permitted to handle the check after it has been signed. Nevertheless, this is exactly what 
happens in most altered payee schemes. The person who prepares the check knows that the 
maker of the check will return it to him after it has been signed. 
 



:


alter check prepar by the fraudster eras ink
when the perpetr prepar the check that is to be alter the scheme tend to be a bit
more sophist the reason for thi is obviou if the perpetr is abl to prepar the
check himself he can prepar it with the thought of how the paye design will be
chang on of the most common wai to prepar a check for alter is to write or type
the paye name and possibl the amount in eras ink after an author maker sign
the check the perpetr retriev the check eras the paye name and insert hi own
in some case employe even obtain signatur on check written in pencil
exampl
a bookkeep type out small check to a local supplier and had the owner of the compani
sign them the bookkeep then us her eras typewrit to lift the paye design and
amount from the check she enter her own name as the paye and rais the amount
precipit for instanc the owner might si gn a 10 check that later becam a 10000
check these check were enter in the disburs journal as payment for aggreg
inventori to the compani largest supplier who receiv sever larg check each month
the bookkeep stole over 300000 fr om her employ in thi scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1523
where a proper separ of duti is in place a person who prepar a check should not be
permit to handl the check after it ha been sign nevertheless thi is exactli what
happen in most alter paye scheme the person who prepar the check know that the
maker of the check will return it to him after it ha been sign
