2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Poor Controls


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Poor Controls 
Although overriding controls is the most blatant way to execute an authorized maker 
scheme, it is not the most common. Far more of these schemes occur because no one is 
paying attention to the accounts and few controls are present to prevent fraud. Some 
employees who write checks to themselves or to purchase items for themselves simply code 
the checks to expense accounts that they know are not likely to be reviewed.  
 
The failure to closely monitor accounts is supplemented by lack of internal controls, 
specifically the absence of separation of duties in the cash disbursements process. 
Employees who commit authorized maker fraud are often in charge of reconciling the bank 
accounts of the business. This is especially common in small businesses. Employees with 
total control over the disbursements process are in a perfect position to write fraudulent 
checks for their own benefit.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.525 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.526                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
The bookkeeper of a medium-sized company was charged with paying all bills and 
preparing the company payroll. She had access to an automatic check signer and total 
control over company bank accounts. The bookkeeper wrote extra checks to herself, coded 
the expenditures to payroll, and destroyed the ca nceled checks when they were returned with 
the bank statement.  
 



:


poor control
although overrid control is the most blatant wai to execut an author maker
scheme it is not the most common far more of these scheme occur becaus no on is
pai attent to the account and few control ar present to prevent fraud some
employe who write check to themselv or to purchas item for themselv simpli code
the check to expens account that thei know ar not like to be review
the failur to close monitor account is supplement by lack of intern control
specif the absenc of separ of duti in the cash disburs process
employe who commit author maker fraud ar often in charg of reconcil the bank
account of the busi thi is especi common in small busi employe with
total control over the disburs process ar in a perfect posit to write fraudul
check for their own benefit
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1525
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1526 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
the bookkeep of a mediums compani wa charg with pai all bill and
prepar the compani payrol she had access to an automat check signer and total
control over compani bank account the bookkeep wrote extra check to herself code
the expenditur to payrol and destroi the ca ncele check when thei were return with
the bank statement
