2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Self-Approval of Fraudulent Invoices


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Self-Approval of Fraudulent Invoices 
The difficulty in a shell company scheme is not usually in producing the invoices, but in 
getting the victim organization to pay them. Authorization for the fictitious purchase (and 
therefore payment of the bill) is the key. In a large percentage of shell company cases, the 
perpetrator is in a position to approve payment on the very invoices he is fraudulently 
submitting. It is obvious the duties of preparing and approving vouchers should be separated 
to avoid this kind of scheme. 
 
In companies where a proper separation of duties exists, the employee with approval 
authority sometimes creates fraudulent vouchers or purchase orders and forges the signature 
of the person who is in charge of preparing these documents. Then the perpetrator approves 
payment on the fraudulent vouchers he has generated. This makes it appear that two 
employees have signed off on the voucher as mandated by the victim organization’s 
controls.  
 
Not all companies require the completion of payment vouchers before they will issue checks. 
In some enterprises, checks are written based on less formal procedures, such as the 
submission of “check requests.” These requests simply list the name of the payee, the 
amount to be paid, and a brief narrative stating the reason for the check. Obviously, this is 
not a very sound procedure for preventing fraud. Dishonest employees have little trouble 
running shell company schemes in organizations that operate this way.  
 



:


selfapprov of fraudul invoic
the difficulti in a shell compani scheme is not usual in produc the invoic but in
get the victim organ to pai them author for the fictiti purchas and
therefor payment of the bill is the kei in a larg percentag of shell compani case the
perpetr is in a posit to approv payment on the veri invoic he is fraudul
submit it is obviou the duti of prepar and approv voucher should be separ
to avoid thi kind of scheme
in compani where a proper separ of duti exist the employe with approv
author sometim creat fraudul voucher or purchas order and forg the signatur
of the person who is in charg of prepar these document then the perpetr approv
payment on the fraudul voucher he ha gener thi make it appear that two
employe have sign off on the voucher as mandat by the victim organ
control
not all compani requir the complet of payment voucher befor thei will issu check
in some enterpris check ar written base on less formal procedur such as the
submiss of check request these request simpli list the name of the paye the
amount to be paid and a brief narr state the reason for the check obvious thi is
not a veri sound procedur for prevent fraud dishonest employe have littl troubl
run shell compani scheme in organ that oper thi wai
