2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Returning Merchandise for Cash


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Returning Merchandise for Cash 
The fraudulent purchases schemes discussed to this point have all involved false purchases 
of merchandise for the sake of obtaining the merchandise. In some cases, however, an 
employee buys items and then returns them for cash.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made fraudulent gains from a business travel account. The employee’s scheme 
began by purchasing tickets for herself and her family through her company’s travel budget. 
Poor separation of duties allowed the fraudster to order the tickets, receive them, prepare 
claims for payments, and distribute checks. The only review of her activities was made by a 
busy and rather uninterested supervisor who approved the employee’s claims without 
requiring support documentation. Eventually, the employee’s scheme evolved. She began to 
purchase airline tickets and return them for their cash value. An employee of the travel 
agency assisted in the scheme by encoding the tickets as though the fraudster had paid for 
them herself. That caused the airlines to pay refunds directly to the fraudster rather than to 
her employer. In the course of two years, this employee embezzled over $100,000 through 
her purchases scheme.  
 



:


return merchandis for cash
the fraudul purchas scheme discuss to thi point have all involv fals purchas
of merchandis for the sake of obtain the merchandis in some case howev an
employe bui item and then return them for cash
exampl
an employe made fraudul gain from a busi travel account the employe scheme
began by purchas ticket for herself and her famili through her compani travel budget
poor separ of duti allow the fraudster to order the ticket receiv them prepar
claim for payment and distribut check the onli review of her activ wa made by a
busi and rather uninterest supervisor who approv the employe claim without
requir support document eventu the employe scheme evolv she began to
purchas airlin ticket and return them for their cash valu an employe of the travel
agenc assist in the scheme by encod the ticket as though the fraudster had paid for
them herself that caus the airlin to pai refund directli to the fraudster rather than to
her employ in the cours of two year thi employe embezzl over 100000 through
her purchas scheme
