2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Analytical Review


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Analytical Review 
A review of the various general ledger accounts might reveal unusual or unexpected events. 
These events could be undetected purchasing fraud. For example, a comparison of inventory 
purchases in relationship to net sales might indicate that purchases are too high or too low 
for that level of sales. This might be a “red flag,” indicating excess purchasing schemes or 
fictitious sales schemes, respectively. 
 
Another analytical method uses a comparison of the inventory purchases of prior years with 
those of the current year. This comparison might indicate that an overbilling scheme or a 
duplicate-payment scheme is in progress. 
 
Analyses such as those described above can be performed for any acquisition of goods or 
services of a company. Analytical reviews are most effective in detecting fraud schemes that 
are large, such that the anomalies will be apparent. Other detection methods are more 
effective for fraud schemes that are smaller in relationship to the financial statements taken 
as a whole. Regardless of fraud size, examination of source documentation will be necessary. 
When an anomaly is detected, further investigation is required, which will demand an 
examination of source documentation. 
 



:


analyt review
a review of the variou gener ledger account might reveal unusu or unexpect event
these event could be undetect purchas fraud for exampl a comparison of inventori
purchas in relationship to net sale might indic that purchas ar too high or too low
for that level of sale thi might be a red flag indic excess purchas scheme or
fictiti sale scheme respect
anoth analyt method us a comparison of the inventori purchas of prior year with
those of the current year thi comparison might indic that an overbil scheme or a
duplicatepay scheme is in progress
analys such as those describ abov can be perform for ani acquisit of good or
servic of a compani analyt review ar most effect in detect fraud scheme that
ar larg such that the anomali will be appar other detect method ar more
effect for fraud scheme that ar smaller in relationship to the financi statement taken
as a whole regardless of fraud size examin of sourc document will be necessari
when an anomali is detect further investig is requir which will demand an
examin of sourc document
