2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Delivery of the Paycheck


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Delivery of the Paycheck  
The final step in a ghost employee scheme is the distribution of the checks to the 
perpetrator. Paychecks might be hand delivered to employees while at work, mailed to 
employees at their home addresses, or — most commonly now — directly deposited into the 
employees’ bank accounts. If employees are paid in currency rather than by check, the 
distribution is almost always conducted in-person and on-site. 
 
Ideally, those in charge of payroll distribution should not have a hand in any of the other 
functions of the payroll cycle. For instance, the person who enters new employees in the 
payroll system should not be allowed to distribute paychecks because this person can include 
a ghost on the payroll, then simply pocket the fraudulent check when paychecks are being 
disbursed. Obviously, when the perpetrator of a ghost employee scheme is allowed to mail 
checks to employees or pass them out at work, he is in a perfect position to ensure that the 
ghost’s check is delivered to himself.  
 
In most instances the perpetrator does not have the authority to distribute paychecks, and so 
must make sure that the victim organization sends the checks to a place where he can 
recover them. When checks are not distributed in the workplace, they are usually mailed to 
employees or deposited directly into those employees’ accounts.  
 
If the fictitious employee was added into the payroll or personnel records by the perpetrator, 
the problem of distribution is usually minor. When the ghost’s employment information is 
entered, the perpetrator simply lists an address or bank account to which the payments can 
be sent. In the case of purely fictitious ghost employees, the address is often the 
perpetrator’s own (the same goes for bank accounts). The fact that two employees (the 
perpetrator and the ghost) are receiving payments at the same destination may indicate 
payroll fraud. Some fraudsters avoid this duplication by having payments sent to a post 
office box or a separate bank account.  
 
Remember that a ghost employee is not always a fictitious person. It may, instead, be a real 
person who is conspiring with the perpetrator to defraud the company. For example, some 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.560                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees place their relatives or spouses on the company payroll. When real persons are 
falsely included on the payroll, the checks are sent to the homes or accounts of these 
persons.  
 
Distribution is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employee who was 
simply not removed from the payroll. If paychecks are distributed through the mail or by 
direct deposit, the perpetrator will have to enter the terminated employee’s records and 
change their delivery information. In companies where paychecks are distributed by hand or 
are held at a central location for employees to collect, the perpetrator can ignore the payroll 
records and simply pick up the fraudulent paychecks.  
 



:


deliveri of the paycheck
the final step in a ghost employe scheme is the distribut of the check to the
perpetr paycheck might be hand deliv to employe while at work mail to
employe at their home address or most commonli now directli deposit into the
employe bank account if employe ar paid in currenc rather than by check the
distribut is almost alwai conduct inperson and onsit
ideal those in charg of payrol distribut should not have a hand in ani of the other
function of the payrol cycl for instanc the person who enter new employe in the
payrol system should not be allow to distribut paycheck becaus thi person can includ
a ghost on the payrol then simpli pocket the fraudul check when paycheck ar be
disburs obvious when the perpetr of a ghost employe scheme is allow to mail
check to employe or pass them out at work he is in a perfect posit to ensur that the
ghost check is deliv to himself
in most instanc the perpetr doe not have the author to distribut paycheck and so
must make sure that the victim organ send the check to a place where he can
recov them when check ar not distribut in the workplac thei ar usual mail to
employe or deposit directli into those employe account
if the fictiti employe wa ad into the payrol or personnel record by the perpetr
the problem of distribut is usual minor when the ghost employ inform is
enter the perpetr simpli list an address or bank account to which the payment can
be sent in the case of pure fictiti ghost employe the address is often the
perpetr own the same goe for bank account the fact that two employe the
perpetr and the ghost ar receiv payment at the same destin mai indic
payrol fraud some fraudster avoid thi duplic by have payment sent to a post
offic box or a separ bank account
rememb that a ghost employe is not alwai a fictiti person it mai instead be a real
person who is conspir with the perpetr to defraud the compani for exampl some
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1560 2011 fraud examin manual
employe place their rel or spous on the compani payrol when real person ar
fals includ on the payrol the check ar sent to the home or account of these
person
distribut is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employe who wa
simpli not remov from the payrol if paycheck ar distribut through the mail or by
direct deposit the perpetr will have to enter the termin employe record and
chang their deliveri inform in compani where paycheck ar distribut by hand or
ar held at a central locat for employe to collect the perpetr can ignor the payrol
record and simpli pick up the fraudul paycheck
