2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Indicators of Payroll Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Indicators of Payroll Fraud 
In addition, the following audit program will help spot red flags to payroll distribution fraud 
and help with installing control procedures: 
• Are personnel records maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions? 
• Is the payroll accounting function independent of the general ledger function? 
• Are changes to payroll not made unless the personnel department sends approved 
notification directly to the payroll department? 
• Are references and backgrounds checked for new hires? 
• Are all wage rates authorized in writing by a designated official? 
• Are signed authorizations on file for employees whose wages are subject to special 
deductions? 
• Are bonuses, commissions, and overtime approved in advance and reviewed for 
compliance with company policies? 
• Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays reviewed for compliance with company policy? 
• Are appropriate forms completed and signed by employees to show authorization for 
payroll deductions and withholding exemptions? 
• Is the payroll periodically checked against the personnel records for terminated 
employees, fictitious employees, etc.? 
• Is a time clock used for office employees as well as factory workers? 
• If a time clock is used, are timecards (1) punched by employees in the presence of a 
designated supervisor and (2) signed by a supervisor at the end of the payroll period? 
• Are timecards and production reports reviewed and compared with payroll distribution 
reports and production schedules? 
• Are payroll registers reviewed and approved before disbursements are made for (1) 
names of employees, (2) hours worked, (3) wage rates, (4) deductions, (5) agreement with 
payroll checks, and (6) unusual items? 
• Are all employees paid by check out of a separate bank payroll account? 
• Are payroll checks prenumbered and issued in numerical sequence? 
• Is access restricted to unissued payroll checks and signature plates? 
• Are checks drawn and signed by designated officials who do not (1) prepare payroll, (2) 
have access to the accounting records, or (3) have custody of cash funds? 
• Are payroll checks distributed by someone other than the department head or the person 
who prepares the payroll? 
• Is the distribution of the payroll rotated periodically to different employees without 
 prior notice? 
• Is the payroll bank account reconciled by a designated employee who (1) is not involved 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.571 
in the preparing of payroll, (2) does not sign the checks, or (3) does not handle the check 
distributions? 
• Do payroll bank account reconciliation procedures include comparing the paid checks to 
the payroll, and scrutinizing canceled check endorsements? 
• Are the payroll registers reconciled to the general ledger control accounts? 
• Is a liability account set up for all wages that have remained unclaimed for a certain 
period of time? If yes, (1) have these wages been redeposited in a special bank account, 
and (2) is identification required to be presented at the time of their subsequent 
distribution?  
• Are distributions of hours (direct and indirect) to activity or departments reviewed and 
approved by supervisory personnel?  
• Are actual payroll amounts reviewed and compared to budgeted amounts, and are 
variances analyzed regularly?  
• Do adequate procedures exist for timely and accurate preparation and filing of payroll 
tax returns and related taxes?  
• Are employee benefit plan contributions reconciled to appropriate employee  
census data?  
• Are adequate, detailed records maintained of the entity’s liability for vacation pay and 
sick pay? Are they reconciled to the general ledger control accounts periodically?  
 
 



:


indic of payrol fraud
in addit the follow audit program will help spot red flag to payrol distribut fraud
and help with instal control procedur
ar personnel record maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
is the payrol account function independ of the gener ledger function
ar chang to payrol not made unless the personnel depart send approv
notif directli to the payrol depart
ar refer and background check for new hire
ar all wage rate author in write by a design offici
ar sign author on file for employe whose wage ar subject to special
deduct
ar bonus commiss and overtim approv in advanc and review for
complianc with compani polici
ar sick leav vacat and holidai review for complianc with compani polici
ar appropri form complet and sign by employe to show author for
payrol deduct and withhold exempt
is the payrol period check against the personnel record for termin
employe fictiti employe etc
is a time clock us for offic employe as well as factori worker
if a time clock is us ar timecard 1 punch by employe in the presenc of a
design supervisor and 2 sign by a supervisor at the end of the payrol period
ar timecard and product report review and compar with payrol distribut
report and product schedul
ar payrol regist review and approv befor disburs ar made for 1
name of employe 2 hour work 3 wage rate 4 deduct 5 agreement with
payrol check and 6 unusu item
ar all employe paid by check out of a separ bank payrol account
ar payrol check prenumb and issu in numer sequenc
is access restrict to unissu payrol check and signatur plate
ar check drawn and sign by design offici who do not 1 prepar payrol 2
have access to the account record or 3 have custodi of cash fund
ar payrol check distribut by someon other than the depart head or the person
who prepar the payrol
is the distribut of the payrol rotat period to differ employe without
prior notic
is the payrol bank account reconcil by a design employe who 1 is not involv
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1571
in the prepar of payrol 2 doe not sign the check or 3 doe not handl the check
distribut
do payrol bank account reconcili procedur includ compar the paid check to
the payrol and scrutin cancel check endors
ar the payrol regist reconcil to the gener ledger control account
is a liabil account set up for all wage that have remain unclaim for a certain
period of time if ye 1 have these wage been redeposit in a special bank account
and 2 is identif requir to be present at the time of their subsequ
distribut
ar distribut of hour direct and indirect to activ or depart review and
approv by supervisori personnel
ar actual payrol amount review and compar to budget amount and ar
varianc analyz regularli
do adequ procedur exist for time and accur prepar and file of payrol
tax return and relat tax
ar employe benefit plan contribut reconcil to appropri employe
censu data
ar adequ detail record maintain of the entiti liabil for vacat pai and
sick pai ar thei reconcil to the gener ledger control account period
