2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Expense Reimbursement Schemes/Mischaracterized Expense Reimbursements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Mischaracterized Expense Reimbursements 
Most companies only reimburse certain expenses of their employees. Which expenses a 
company will pay for depends to an extent upon policy, but in general, business-related 
travel, lodging, and meals are reimbursed. One of the most basic expense reimbursement 
schemes is perpetrated by simply requesting reimbursement for a personal expense by 
claiming that the expense is business-related. (See “Mischaracterized Expenses” flowchart.) 
Examples of mischaracterized expenses include claiming personal travel as a business trip, 
listing dinner with a friend as “business development,” and so on. Employees submit the 
receipts from their personal expenses along with their expense reports, but concoct business 
reasons for the incurred costs. The false expense report induces the victim organization to 
issue a check, reimbursing the perpetrator for his personal expenses.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.573 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.574                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In cases involving airfare and overnight travel, a mischaracterization can sometimes be 
detected by simply comparing the employee’s expense reports to his work schedule. Often, 
the dates of the so-called “business trip” coincide with a vacation or day off. Detailed 
expense reports allow a company to make this kind of comparison and are therefore very  
helpful in preventing expenses schemes.  
 
A common element to mischaracterized expense schemes is the failure to submit detailed 
expense reports, or any expense reports at all. Some companies allow employees to simply 
turn in receipts, without explaining the business purpose of the expenses reflected in the 
receipts. This makes it exceedingly easy for an employee to turn in, for example, a receipt 
from a restaurant and receive a check to reimburse him for a “business dinner.” Other 
companies provide employees with company credit cards and/or procurement cards and 
allow employees to spend company funds without providing detailed information justifying 
the purchase and sometimes not even requiring receipts. Requiring detailed information 
means more than just supporting documents; it should mean precise statements of what was 
purchased, as well as when, where, and for whom the purchase was made. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A fraudster submitted credit ca rd statements as support for expenses, but he only submitted 
the top portion of the statements, not the port ion that describes what  was purchased. Over 
95 percent of his expenses that were reimbur sed were of a personal rather than a business 
nature.  
 
Even when detailed expense reports are required, it may be difficult to detect a 
mischaracterized expense reimbursement scheme. For example, suppose a traveling salesman 
goes on a trip and runs up a large bar bill one night in his hotel, saves his receipt, and lists 
this expense as “business entertainment” on an expense report. Nothing about the time, 
date, or nature of the expense would readily point to fraud, and the receipt would appear to 
substantiate the expense. Short of contacting the client who was allegedly entertained, there 
may be little a victim organization can do to identify the expense as fraudulent.  
 



:


mischaracter expens reimburs
most compani onli reimburs certain expens of their employe which expens a
compani will pai for depend to an extent upon polici but in gener businessrel
travel lodg and meal ar reimburs on of the most basic expens reimburs
scheme is perpetr by simpli request reimburs for a person expens by
claim that the expens is businessrel see mischaracter expens flowchart
exampl of mischaracter expens includ claim person travel as a busi trip
list dinner with a friend as busi develop and so on employe submit the
receipt from their person expens along with their expens report but concoct busi
reason for the incur cost the fals expens report induc the victim organ to
issu a check reimburs the perpetr for hi person expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1573
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1574 2011 fraud examin manual
in case involv airfar and overnight travel a mischaracter can sometim be
detect by simpli compar the employe expens report to hi work schedul often
the date of the socal busi trip coincid with a vacat or dai off detail
expens report allow a compani to make thi kind of comparison and ar therefor veri
help in prevent expens scheme
a common element to mischaracter expens scheme is the failur to submit detail
expens report or ani expens report at all some compani allow employe to simpli
turn in receipt without explain the busi purpos of the expens reflect in the
receipt thi make it exceedingli easi for an employe to turn in for exampl a receipt
from a restaur and receiv a check to reimburs him for a busi dinner other
compani provid employe with compani credit card andor procur card and
allow employe to spend compani fund without provid detail inform justifi
the purchas and sometim not even requir receipt requir detail inform
mean more than just support document it should mean precis statement of what wa
purchas as well as when where and for whom the purchas wa made
exampl
a fraudster submit credit ca rd statement as support for expens but he onli submit
the top portion of the statement not the port ion that describ what wa purchas over
95 percent of hi expens that were reimbur sed were of a person rather than a busi
natur
even when detail expens report ar requir it mai be difficult to detect a
mischaracter expens reimburs scheme for exampl suppos a travel salesman
goe on a trip and run up a larg bar bill on night in hi hotel save hi receipt and list
thi expens as busi entertain on an expens report noth about the time
date or natur of the expens would readili point to fraud and the receipt would appear to
substanti the expens short of contact the client who wa allegedli entertain there
mai be littl a victim organ can do to identifi the expens as fraudul
