2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/The Bank Secrecy Act


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


The Bank Secrecy Act 
The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which went into effect in 1970, was the first major piece of 
legislation aimed at detecting and preventing money laundering. The purpose of the law as 
stated in section 5311 is “to require certain re ports or records where they have a high degree 
of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations or proceedings.” The BSA sets 
forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements designed to help track large or 
unusual financial transactions. 
 
The BSA consists of two titles. Title I contains provisions requiring that financial institutions 
and securities brokers and dealers keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of 
their customers. It is codified in Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 1829b 
and 1951–1959. Title II of the BSA (originally  entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions 
Reporting Act) requires banks, “financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities 
brokers and dealers, currency exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to 
report to the government certain transactions. Title II is codified at 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–
 5330. 
 
For more information on the examination process and the compliance procedures financial 
institutions are required to follow, please review the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money 
Laundering Examination Manual published by the Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council. It is available for viewing on their website (www.ffiec.gov). 
 



:


the bank secreci act
the bank secreci act bsa which went into effect in 1970 wa the first major piec of
legisl aim at detect and prevent monei launder the purpos of the law as
state in section 5311 is to requir certain re port or record where thei have a high degre
of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig or proceed the bsa set
forth a system of report and recordkeep requir design to help track larg or
unusu financi transact
the bsa consist of two titl titl i contain provis requir that financi institut
and secur broker and dealer keep extens record of the transact and account of
their custom it is codifi in titl 12 of the unit state code usc section 1829b
and 19511959 titl ii of the bsa origin entitl currenc and foreign transact
report act requir bank financi institut which includ casino secur
broker and dealer currenc exchang and other and in some case individu to
report to the govern certain transact titl ii is codifi at 31 usc 5311
5330
for more inform on the examin process and the complianc procedur financi
institut ar requir to follow pleas review the bank secreci actantimonei
launder examin manual publish by the feder financi institut
examin council it is avail for view on their websit wwwffiecgov
