2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS 
 
In fraudulent disbursement schemes, an employee makes a distribution of company funds 
for a dishonest purpose. Examples of fraudulent disbursements include forging company 
checks, the submission of false invoices, doctoring timecards, and so forth. On their face, 
the fraudulent disbursements do not appear any different from valid disbursements of cash. 
For instance, when an employee runs a bogus invoice through the accounts payable system, 
the victim organization cuts a check for the bad invoice right along with all the legitimate 
payments it makes. The perpetrator has taken money from his employer in such a way that it 
appears to be a normal disbursement of cash. Someone might notice the fraud based on the 
amount, recipient, or destination of the payment, but the method of payment is legitimate.  
 
 
Register Disbursement Schemes 
Fraudulent disbursements at the cash register are different from the other schemes that 
often take place at the register, such as skimming and cash larceny. When cash is stolen as 
part of a register disbursement scheme, the removal of the cash is recorded on the register 
tape. A false transaction is entered so it appears that the disbursement of money was 
legitimate.  
 
There are two basic register disbursements schemes: false refunds and false voids. While the 
schemes are largely similar, there are a few differences between the two that merit discussing 
them separately.  
 
False Refunds 
A refund is processed at the register when a customer returns an item of merchandise that 
was purchased from the store. The transaction that is entered on the register indicates the 
merchandise is being replaced in the store’s inventory and the purchase price is being 
returned to the customer. In other words, a refund shows cash being disbursed from the 
register to the customer. (See “False Refunds” flowchart.) 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.502                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.503 
Fictitious Refunds 
In a fictitious refund scheme, an employee processes a transaction as if a customer were 
returning merchandise, even though there is no actual return. Two things result from this 
fraudulent transaction. The first is that the employee takes cash from the register in the 
amount of the false return. For instance, if the employee processes a fictitious return for a 
$100 pair of shoes, he removes $100 from the register. The register tape will indicate that the 
shoes were returned, so the disbursement appears to be legitimate. The register tape balances 
with the amount of cash on hand because the fraudulent refund accounts for the cash that 
the employee stole.  
 
The second thing that happens in a fictitious refund scheme is that a debit is made to the 
inventory system showing that the merchandise has been returned to the inventory. Since 
the transaction is fictitious, no merchandise is actually returned. The result is that the 
company’s inventory is overstated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager created $5,500 worth of false re turns, resulting in a large shortage in the 
company’s inventory. He was able to carry his scheme on for several months, however, 
because (1) inventory was not counted regularly, and (2) the perpetrator, a manager, was 
one of the people who performed inventory counts.  
 
Overstated Refunds 
Rather than create an entirely fictitious refund, some employees merely overstate the amount 
of a legitimate refund and steal the excess money. For example, if a customer returns $100 
worth of merchandise, the employee might ring up a $200 return. The employee gives the 
customer $100 in return for the merchandise, then pockets the remaining $100. This will 
result in shrinkage of $100 worth of inventory.  
 
Credit Card Refunds 
When purchases are made with a credit card rather than cash, refunds appear as credits to 
the customer’s credit card rather than as cash disbursements. Some dishonest employees 
process false refunds on credit card sales in lieu of processing a normal cash transaction. 
One benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetrator does not have to physically take 
cash from the register and carry it out of the store. By processing the refunds to a credit card 
account, a perpetrator reaps a financial gain and avoids the potential embarrassment of being 
caught red-handed taking cash.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.504                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In a typical credit card refund scheme, the perpetrator rings up a refund on a credit card sale, 
even though the merchandise is not actually being returned. The employee credits his own 
credit card number rather than the customer’s. The result is that the cost of the item is 
credited to the perpetrator’s credit card account.  
 
A more creative and wide-ranging application of the credit card refund scheme occurs when 
employees process refunds to the accounts of other people, and in return receive a portion 
of the refund as a kickback. Suppose a person is $100 short on the rent. That person goes to 
the retail store where his friend is a teller and has the teller process a credit of $150 to his 
account. The “customer” then goes to an ATM machine and withdraws $150 in cash. He 
pays $50 to the teller and keeps $100 for himself.  
 
Refund schemes are more difficult to perpetrate in many high-tech retail stores where the 
cash registers have anti-fraud controls that require the refund to be made to the original 
credit card used for the purchase or that only allow for refunds in the form of a store credit 
for the current value of the item purchased.    
 
False Voids 
Fictitious voids are similar to refund schemes in that they make fraudulent disbursements 
from the register appear to be legitimate. When a sale is voided on a register, a copy of the 
customer’s receipt is usually attached to a void slip, along with the signature or initials of a 
manager indicating that the transaction has been approved. (See “False Voids” flowchart.) In 
order to process a false void, then, the first thing the perpetrator needs is the customer’s 
copy of the sales receipt. Typically, when an employee sets about processing a fictitious void, 
he simply withholds the customer’s receipt at the time of the sale. In many cases customers 
do not notice that they are not given a receipt.  
 
With the customer’s copy of the receipt in hand, the culprit rings a voided sale. Whatever 
money the customer paid for the item is removed from the register as though it is being 
returned to a customer. The copy of the customer’s receipt is attached to the void slip to 
verify the authenticity of the transaction.  
 
Before the voided sale will be perceived as valid, a manager generally must approve the 
transaction. In many instances, the manager in question simply neglects to verify the 
authenticity of the voided sale. A number of managers will sign most anything presented to 
them and thus leave themselves vulnerable to voided sales schemes. It is not a coincidence 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.505 
that the perpetrators of these crimes present their void slips to managers who are 
lackadaisical about authorizing them. These kinds of managers are generally targeted by the 
fraudsters and are essential to the success of the schemes.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.506                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.507 
EXAMPLE 
An employee processed fraudulent voids, kept customer receipts, and presented them to her 
supervisors for review at the end of her shift, long after the alleged transactions had taken 
place. Her supervisors approved the voided sales and the accounts receivable department 
failed to notice the excessive number of voided sales processed by this employee.  
 
Obviously, not all managers give rubber-stamp approval to voided sales. Some employees 
must therefore take other routes to get their voided sales “approved.” In most of these cases 
the perpetrator simply forges his supervisor’s authorization on the fraudulent void slips. It is 
also possible that managers will conspire with register employees and approve false voids in 
return for a share of the proceeds from the scheme.  
 
Concealing Register Disbursement Schemes 
As has already been discussed, two things happen when a false refund or void is entered into 
the register. The first is that the employee committing the fraud removes cash from the 
register, and the second is that the item allegedly being returned is debited back into the 
perpetual inventory. Of course, there really is no merchandise being returned. This leads to 
inventory shrinkage, a situation in which there is less inventory actually on hand than the 
perpetual inventory records reflect. A certain amount of shrinkage is expected in any retail 
industry, but too much of it raises concerns of fraud. It is therefore in the perpetrator’s best 
interests to conceal the appearance of shrinkage on the books.  
 
Inventory is essentially accounted for by a two-step process. The first part of the process is 
the perpetual inventory, which is a running tabulation of how much inventory should be on 
hand. When a sale of merchandise is made, the perpetual inventory is credited to remove this 
merchandise from the records. The amount of merchandise that should be on hand is 
reduced. (Conversely, when merchandise is returned the perpetual inventory is debited.) 
Periodically, someone from the company takes a physical count of the inventory, going 
through the stockroom or warehouse and counting the amount of inventory that is actually on 
hand. The two figures are then compared to see if there is a discrepancy between the 
perpetual inventory (what should be on hand) and the physical inventory (what is on hand). 
 
In register disbursement schemes, shrinkage is often concealed by overstating inventory 
during the physical count, especially if taking inventory is one of the perpetrator’s duties. 
The perpetrator simply overstates the amount of inventory on hand so it matches the 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.508                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
perpetual inventory. For a more detailed analysis of methods used to conceal inventory 
shrinkage, please see the Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 
Small Disbursements 
Another way for employees to avoid detection in a refund scheme is to keep the sizes of the 
disbursements low. Many companies set limits below which management review of a refund 
is not required. Where this is the case, employees simply process copious numbers of 
refunds that are small enough that they do not have to be reviewed.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee created over 1,000 false refunds, all under the review limit of $15. He was 
eventually caught because he began processing refunds before store hours and another 
employee noticed that refunds were appearing on the system before the store opened. 
Nevertheless, before his scheme was detected the man made off with over $11,000 of his 
employer’s money.  
 
Destroying Records 
One final means of concealing a register scheme, as with many kinds of fraud, is to destroy 
all records of the transaction. Most concealment methods are concerned with keeping 
management from realizing that fraud has occurred. When an employee resorts to destroying 
records, however, he typically has conceded that management will discover his theft. The 
purpose of destroying records is usually to prevent management from determining who the 
thief is.  
 
Detection of Register Disbursement Schemes 
Fictitious Refunds or Voided Sales 
Fictitious refunds or voided sales can often be detected when closely examining the 
documentation submitted with the cash receipts.  
• One detection method is to evaluate the refunds or discounts given by each cashier or 
salesperson. This analysis may point out that a single employee or group of employees 
has a higher incidence of refunds or discounts than others. Further examination is then 
necessary to determine if the refunds are appropriate and properly documented. 
• Signs in the register area asking customers to ask for and examine their receipts employ 
the customer as part of the internal control system. This helps ensure that the cashier or 
salesperson is properly accounting for the sale and prevents employees from using 
customer receipts as support for false void or refunds. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.509 
• Random service calls to customers who have returned merchandise or voided sales can 
be used to verify the legitimacy of transactions.  
 
Review and Analysis of Decreases in Gross Sales and/or Increases in Returns and Allowances 
Analyzing the relationship between sales, cost of sales, and the returns and allowances can 
detect inappropriate refunds and discounts. If a large cash fraud is suspected, a thorough 
review of these accounts might enlighten the examiner as to the magnitude of the suspected 
fraud. An analysis of refunds and returns and allowances with the actual flow of inventory 
might reveal some fraud schemes. The refund should cause an entry to inventory, even if it is 
damaged inventory. Likewise, a return will cause a corresponding entry to an inventory 
account. There should be a linear relationship between sales and returns and allowances over 
a relevant range. Any change in this relationship might point to a fraud scheme unless there 
is another valid explanation such as a change in the manufacturing process, change in 
product line, or change in price. 
 
Register Scheme Red Flags 
• Inappropriate employee segregation of duties. For example, register counting and 
reconciling should not be done by the cashier. 
• Cashiers, rather than supervisors, have access to the control keys that are necessary for 
refunds and voids. 
• Register employee has authority to void own transactions. 
• Register refunds are not methodically reviewed. 
• Multiple cashiers operate from a single cash drawer without separate access codes. 
• Personal checks from cashier found in register. 
• Voided transactions are not properly documented or not approved by a supervisor. 
• Voided cash receipt forms (manual systems) or supporting documents for voided 
transactions (cash register systems) are not retained on file. 
• Missing or obviously altered register tapes. 
• Gaps in the sequence of transactions on register tape. 
• An inordinate number of refunds, voids, or no-sales on register tape. 
• Inventory totals appear forced. 
• Multiple refunds or voids for am ounts just under the review limit. 
 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.510                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Prevention of Register Disbursement Schemes 
• Review the segregation of duties of key employees who staff the register as well as the 
duties of their supervisors.  
• As cash is received it is important to ensure that the employees responsible for 
completing these important tasks are informed of their responsibilities and properly 
supervised.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have paid money on an account 
and have not received credit, or in some cases, who have been credited for an amount 
that does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and inquiries are also 
received frequently from banks. 
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• Quantity of refunds should be analyzed to detect multiple small refunds. 
• Communicate and adhere to company policy of performing unannounced cash counts. 
• Maintain the presence of a manager or supervisor near the area of the cash register as a 
deterrent to theft. 
• Review supporting documents for voided and refunded transactions for propriety (i.e., 
legitimacy and approvals). 
• Review the numerical sequence and completeness of cash register tapes. 
 
 
Check Tampering
Check tampering is unique among the fraudulent disbursement schemes because it is the one 
group in which the perpetrator physically prepares the fraudulent check. In most fraudulent 
disbursement schemes, the culprit generates a payment to himself by submitting some false 
document to the victim organization such as an invoice or a timecard. The false document 
represents a claim for payment and causes the victim organization to issue a check that the 
perpetrator can convert.  
 
Check tampering schemes are fundamentally different. In these schemes the perpetrator 
takes physical control of a check and makes it payable to himself through one of several 
methods. Check tampering frauds depend upon factors such as access to the company 
checkbook, access to bank statements, and the ability to forge signatures or alter other 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.511 
information on the face of the check. Most check tampering crimes fall into one of four 
categories: forged maker schemes, forged endorsement schemes, altered payee schemes, and 
authorized maker schemes.  
 
Forged Maker Schemes    
The legal definition of forgery includes not only the signing of another person’s name to a 
document (such as a check) with a fraudulent intent, but also the fraudulent alteration of a 
genuine instrument. This definition is so broad that it would encompass all check tampering 
schemes. For the purposes of this text, the definition of forgery has been narrowed to fit the 
fraud examiner’s needs. In order to properly distinguish the various methods used by 
individuals to tamper with checks, the concept of “forgeries” will be limited to those cases in 
which an individual signs another person’s name on a check.  
 
The person who signs a check is known as the “maker” of the check. A forged maker 
scheme, then, may be defined as a check tampering scheme in which an employee 
misappropriates a check and fraudulently affixes the signature of an authorized maker 
thereon. (See “Forged Maker Schemes” flowchart.) Frauds that involve other types of check 
tampering, such as the alteration of the payee or the changing of the dollar amount, are 
classified separately.  
 
In order to forge a check, an employee must have access to a blank check, he must be able 
to produce a convincing forgery of an authorized signature, and he must be able to conceal 
his crime. Concealment is a universal problem in check tampering schemes; the methods 
used are basically the same whether one is dealing with a forged maker scheme, an 
intercepted check scheme, a concealed check scheme, or an authorized maker scheme. 
Therefore, concealment issues will be discussed as a group later in this section.  
 
Obtaining the Check 
EMPLOYEES WITH ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
One cannot forge a company check unless one first possesses a company check. Most 
forgery schemes are committed by accounts payable clerks, office managers, bookkeepers, or 
other employees whose duties typically include the preparation of company checks. These 
are people who have access to the company checkbook on a regular basis and are therefore 
in the best position to steal blank checks.  
                                                          
1 Henry Campbell Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, Fifth Edition  (St. Paul: West Publishing Co., 1979) p. 585.   
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.512                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EMPLOYEES LACKING ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
If the perpetrator does not have access to the company checkbook through his work duties, 
he will have to find other means of misappropriating a check. The way a person steals a 
check depends largely on how the checkbook is handled within a particular company. In 
some circumstances the checkbook is poorly guarded, left in unattended areas where anyone 
can get to it. In other companies where blank checks are kept in a restricted area, the 
perpetrator might have surreptitiously obtained a key or combination to this area. An 
accomplice might provide blank checks for the perpetrator in return for a portion of the 
stolen funds. Perhaps a secretary sees the checkbook left on a manager’s desk or a custodian 
comes across blank checks in an unlocked desk drawer.  
 
In some companies, checks are computer generated. When this is the case, an employee who 
knows the password for preparing and issuing checks can usually obtain as many unsigned 
checks as he desires. There are an unlimited number of ways to steal a check, each 
dependent on the way in which a particular company guards its blank checks. In some 
instances, employees go so far as to produce counterfeit checks.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee had an accomplice who worked for a check-printing company. The accomplice 
was able to print blank checks with the account number of the perpetrator’s company. The 
perpetrator then wrote over $100,000 worth of forgeries on these counterfeit checks.  
 
To Whom Is the Check Made Payable?  
TO THE PERPETRATOR 
Once a blank check has been obtained, the perpetrator must decide to whom it should be 
made payable. In most instances forged checks are made payable to the perpetrator himself 
so that they can be easily converted. Canceled checks that are payable to an employee should 
be closely scrutinized for the possibility of fraud.  
 
If the perpetrator owns his own business or has established a shell company, he will usually 
write fraudulent checks to these entities rather than himself. These checks are not as 
obviously fraudulent on their faces as checks made payable to an employee. At the same 
time, these checks are easy to convert because the perpetrator owns the entity to which the 
checks are payable.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.513 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.514                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
TO AN ACCOMPLICE  
If a fraudster is working with an accomplice, he can make the forged check payable to that 
person. The accomplice then cashes the check and splits the money with the employee-fraudster. 
Because the check is payable to the accomplice in his true identity, it is easily 
converted. An additional benefit to using an accomplice is that a canceled check payable to a 
third-party accomplice is not as likely to raise suspicion as a canceled check to an employee. 
The obvious drawback to using an accomplice in a scheme is that the employee-fraudster 
usually has to share the proceeds of the scheme. 
 
TO “CASH”   
The perpetrator may also write checks payable to “cash” in order to avoid listing himself as 
the payee. Checks made payable to cash, however, must still be endorsed. The perpetrator 
will have to sign his own name or forge the name of another in order to convert the check. 
Checks payable to “cash” are usually viewed more  skeptically than checks payable to persons 
or businesses. Some institutions may refuse to cash checks made payable to “cash.”  
 
TO VENDORS 
Not all fraudsters forge company checks to obtain cash. Some employees use forged maker 
schemes to purchase goods or services for their own benefit. These fraudulent checks are 
made payable to third-party vendors who are uninvolved in the fraud. For instance, an 
employee might forge a company check to buy a computer for his home. The computer 
vendor is not involved in the fraud at all. Furthermore, if the victim organization regularly 
does business with this vendor, the person who reconciles the company’s accounts may 
assume that the check was used for a legitimate business expense.  
 
Forging the Signature 
After the employee has obtained and prepared a blank check, he must forge an authorized 
signature in order to convert the check. The most obvious method, and the one that comes 
to mind when one thinks of the word “forgery,” is to simply take pen in hand and sign the 
name of an authorized maker.  
 
FREE-HAND FORGERY 
The difficulty a fraudster encounters when physically signing the authorized maker’s name is 
in creating a reasonable approximation of the true signature. If the forgery appears authentic, 
the perpetrator will probably have no problem cashing the check. In truth, the forged 
signature may not have to be particularly accurate. Many fraudsters cash forged checks at 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.515 
liquor stores, grocery stores, or other institutions that are known to be less than diligent in 
verifying signatures and identification. Nevertheless, a poorly forged signature is a clear red 
flag of fraud. The maker’s signature on can celed checks should be reviewed for forgeries 
during the reconciliation process.  
 
PHOTOCOPIED FORGERIES 
To guarantee an accurate forgery, some employees make photocopies of legitimate 
signatures. The signature of an authorized signer is copied from some document (such as a 
business letter) onto a transparency, then the transparency is laid over a blank check so that 
the signature copies onto the maker line of the check. The result is a check with a perfect 
signature of an authorized maker.  
 
AUTOMATIC CHECK-SIGNING INSTRUMENTS 
Companies that issue a large number of checks sometimes utilize automatic check-signing 
instruments. Automated signatures are either produced with manual instruments like 
signature stamps or they are printed by computer. Obviously, an employee who has access to 
an automatic check-signing instrument will have no trouble forging the signatures of 
authorized makers. Even the most rudimentary control procedures should severely limit 
access to these instruments.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A fiscal officer maintained a set of manual checks that were unknown to other persons in 
the company. The company used an automated check signer and the custodian of the signer 
let the officer have uncontrolled access to it. Using the manual checks and the company’s 
check signer, the fiscal officer was able to write over $90,000 worth of fraudulent checks to 
himself over a period of approximately four years.  
 
The same principle applies to computer-generated signatures. Access to the password or 
program that prints signed checks should be restricted, specifically excluding those who 
prepare checks and those who reconcile the bank statement.  
 
Converting the Check 
In order to convert the forged check, the perpetrator must endorse it. The endorsement is 
typically made in the name of the payee on the check. Since identification is typically 
required when one seeks to convert a check, the perpetrator usually needs fake identification 
if he forges checks to real or fictitious third persons. As discussed earlier, checks payable to 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.516                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“cash” require the endorsement of the person converting them. Without a fake ID the 
perpetrator will likely have to endorse these checks in his own name. An employee’s 
endorsement on a canceled check is obviously a red flag.  
 
Forged Endorsement Schemes 
Forged endorsements are those check tampering schemes in which an employee intercepts a 
company check intended to pay a third party and converts the check by endorsing it in the 
third-party’s name. In some cases the employee also signs his own name as a second 
endorser. (See “Forged Endorsement Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
A fraudster’s main dilemma in a forged endorsement scheme (and in all intercepted check 
schemes, for that matter) is gaining access to a check after it has been signed. The fraudster 
must either steal the check between the point where it is signed and the point where it is 
delivered, or he must re-route the check, causing it to be delivered to a location where he can 
retrieve it. The manner used to steal a check depends largely upon the way the company 
handles outgoing disbursements. Anyone who is allowed to handle signed checks may be in 
a good position to intercept them.  
 
Intercepting Checks Before Delivery 
EMPLOYEES INVOLVED IN DELIVERY OF CHECKS 
Obviously, the employees in the best position to intercept signed checks are those whose 
duties include the handling and delivery of signed checks. The most obvious example is a 
mailroom employee who opens outgoing mail containing signed checks and steals the 
checks. Other personnel with access to outgoing checks might include accounts payable 
employees, payroll clerks, and secretaries. 
 
POOR CONTROL OF SIGNED CHECKS 
Unfortunately, employees are often able to intercept signed checks because of poor internal 
controls. For instance, many employees simply find signed checks left unattended in the 
work areas of the persons who signed them or the persons charged with their delivery. In 
these cases it is easy for the perpetrator to steal the check. Another common breakdown 
occurs when the person who prepares a check is also involved in the delivery of that check 
once it has been signed.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.517 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.518                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A high-level manager with authority to disburse employee benefits instructed accounts 
payable personnel to return signed benefits checks to him instead of immediately delivering 
them to their intended recipients. These instructions were not questioned due to the 
manager’s level of authority within the company. The perpetrator simply took the checks 
that were returned to him and deposited them  into his personal bank account, forging the 
endorsements of the intended payees.  
 
In addition to the preceding example, secretaries or clerks who prepare checks for their 
bosses to sign are often responsible for mailing those checks. It is very simple for those 
employees to make out a fraudulent check and obtain a signature, knowing that the boss will 
give the signed check right back to them. This scheme is indicative of the key problem with 
occupational fraud: trust. In order for an office to run efficiently, high-level employees must 
be able to rely on their subordinates. Yet this reliance is precisely what puts subordinates in a 
position to defraud their employer.  
 
Theft of Returned Checks 
Checks that have been mailed and are later returned to the victim for some reason, such as 
an incorrect address, are often targeted for theft by fraudsters. Employees with access to 
incoming mail are able to intercept these returned checks and convert them by forging the 
endorsement of the intended payee.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager took and converted approximately $130,000 worth of checks that were 
returned due to noncurrent addresses (he also stole outgoing checks, cashed them, and then 
declared them lost). The fraudster was well known at his bank and was able to convert the 
checks by claiming that he was doing it as a favor to the real payees, who were “too busy to 
come to the bank.” The fraudster was able to continue with his scheme because the nature 
of his company’s business was such that the recipients of the misdelivered checks were often 
not aware that the victim company owed them  money. Therefore, they did not complain 
when their checks failed to arrive. In addition, the perpetrator had complete control over the 
bank reconciliation, so he could issue new checks to those payees who did complain, then 
“force” the reconciliation, making it appear that the bank balance and book balance 
matched when, in fact, they did not.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.519 
Re-Routing the Delivery of Checks 
Employees may also misappropriate signed checks by altering the addresses to which those 
checks are mailed. These perpetrators usually replace the legitimate address of the payee with 
an address where the employee can retrieve the check, such as the employee’s home or a 
P.O. box the employee controls. In other instances, the perpetrator might purposely 
misaddress a check so that it will be returned as undeliverable. The employee steals the check 
after it is returned to the victim organization.  
 
Obviously, proper separation of duties should  preclude anyone who prepares disbursements 
from being involved in their delivery. Nevertheless, the person who prepares a check is often 
allowed to address and mail it as well. In some instances where proper controls are in place, 
employees are still able to cause the misdelivery of checks. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk in the customer service department of a mortgage company was in charge of 
changing the mailing addresses of property ow ners. She was assigned a password that gave 
her access to make these changes. The clerk was transferred to a new department where one 
of her duties was the issuance of checks to property owners. Unfortunately, her supervisor 
forgot to cancel her old password. When the clerk realized this oversight, she would request 
a check for a certain property owner, then sign onto the system with her old password and 
change the address of that property owner. The check would be sent to her. The next day 
the employee would use her old password to re-enter the system and replace the proper 
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent. This fraudster’s 
scheme resulted in a loss of over $250,000 to the victim company.  
 
Converting the Stolen Check 
Once a check has been intercepted, the perpetrator can cash it by forging the payee’s 
signature, hence the term forged endorsement scheme. Depending on where he tries to cash the 
check, the perpetrator may or may not need fake identification at this stage. If a perpetrator 
is required to produce identification in order to cash his stolen check, and if he does not 
have a fake ID in the payee’s name, he may use a dual endorsement to cash or deposit the 
check. In other words, the perpetrator forges the payee’s signature as though the payee had 
transferred the check to him, then the perpetrator endorses the check in his own name and 
converts it. When the bank statement is reconciled, dual endorsements on checks should 
always raise suspicions, particularly when the second signer is an employee of the company. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.520                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Altered Payee Schemes 
The second type of intercepted check scheme is the altered payee scheme. This is a form of 
check tampering in which an employee intercepts a company check intended for a third 
party and alters the payee designation so that the check can be converted by the employee or 
an accomplice. (See “Altered Payee Schemes” flowchart.) The employee inserts his own 
name, the name of an accomplice, or the name of a fictitious entity on the payee line of the 
check. The alteration essentially makes the check payable to the employee (or an 
accomplice), so there is no need to forge an endorsement and no need to obtain false 
identification.  
 
Altering Checks Prepared by Others: Inserting a New Payee 
The method used to alter the payee designation on a check depends largely on how that 
check is prepared and intercepted. (Incidentally, the amount  of the check may also be altered 
at the same time and by the same method as the payee designation.) Checks prepared by 
others can be intercepted by any of the methods discussed in the forged endorsements 
section above. When the perpetrator intercepts a check that has been prepared by someone 
else, there are basically two methods that may be employed to change the payee. The first is 
to insert the false payee’s name in place of  the true payee’s. The true name might be 
scratched out with a pen or covered up with white-out. Another name is then entered on the 
payee designation line. These kinds of alterations are usually simple to detect.  
 
A more sophisticated method occurs when the perpetrator of the fraud enters the accounts 
payable system and changes the names of payees before checks are generated. This can be 
accomplished by anyone with a password that permits access to the accounts payable  
address file.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable employee was so trusted that her manager allowed her to use his 
computer password in his absence. The password permitted access to the accounts payable 
address file. This employee waited until the manager was absent, then selected a legitimate 
vendor with whom her company did a lot of business. She held up the vendor’s invoices for 
the day, and after work used the manager’s log-in code to change the vendor name and 
address to that of a fictitious company. The new name and address were run through the 
accounts payable cycle with an old invoice number, causing a fraudulent check to be issued. 
The victim company had an automated duplicate invoice test, but the perpetrator 
circumvented it substituting “1” for “I” and “0” (zero) for capital “O.” The next day, 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.521 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.522                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 the employee would replace the true vendor’s name and address, and mutilate the check 
register so that the check payable to the fi ctitious vendor was concealed. Approximately 
$300,000 in false checks was issued using this method.  
 
Altering Checks Prepared by Others: “Tacking On” 
The other method that can be used by perpetrators to alter checks prepared by others is 
“tacking on” additional letters or words to the end of the real payee designation. For 
instance, checks payable to “ABC” company might be altered to read “A.B. Collins.” The 
employee then cashes the checks in the name of A.B. Collins. It sounds like an odd scheme, 
but it really happens. In these cases, the simple inclusion of a filler line after the payee 
designation would prevent the loss.  
 
In addition to altering the payee designation, the amount of the check can be altered by 
tacking on extra numbers if the person preparing the check is careless and leaves space for 
extra numbers in the “Amount” portion of the check. 
 
Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Erasable Ink 
When the perpetrator prepares the check that is to be altered, the schemes tend to be a bit 
more sophisticated. The reason for this is obvious:  If the perpetrator is able to prepare the 
check himself, he can prepare it with the thought of how the payee designation will be 
changed. One of the most common ways to prepare a check for alteration is to write or type 
the payee’s name (and possibly the amount) in erasable ink. After an authorized maker signs 
the check, the perpetrator retrieves the check, erases the payee’s name, and inserts his own. 
In some cases, employees even obtain signatures on checks written in pencil. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A bookkeeper typed out small checks to a local supplier and had the owner of the company 
sign them. The bookkeeper then used her erasing typewriter to lift the payee designation and 
amount from the check. She entered her own name as the payee and raised the amount 
precipitously. For instance, the owner might si gn a $10 check that later became a $10,000 
check. These checks were entered in the disbursements journal as payments for aggregate 
inventory to the company’s largest supplier, who received several large checks each month. 
The bookkeeper stole over $300,000 fr om her employer in this scheme.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.523 
Where a proper separation of duties is in place, a person who prepares a check should not be 
permitted to handle the check after it has been signed. Nevertheless, this is exactly what 
happens in most altered payee schemes. The person who prepares the check knows that the 
maker of the check will return it to him after it has been signed. 
 
Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Blank Checks 
The most egregious example of poor controls in the handling of signed checks is one in 
which the perpetrator prepares a check, leaves the payee designation blank, and submits it to an 
authorized maker who signs the check and returns it to the employee. Obviously, this makes 
it quite easy for the perpetrator to designate himself or an accomplice as the payee. Common 
sense should prevent anyone from giving a signed, blank check to another person. 
Nevertheless, this is a fairly common occurrence, especially when the perpetrator is a trusted 
long-time employee.  
 
Converting Altered Checks 
As with all other types of fraudulent checks, conversion is accomplished by endorsing the 
checks in the name of the payee. Conversion of fraudulent checks has already been discussed 
in previous sections and will not be re-examined here.  
 
Authorized Maker Schemes  
The final check tampering scheme, the authorized maker scheme, may be the most difficult 
to defend against. An authorized maker scheme occurs when an employee with signature 
authority on a company account writes fraudulent checks for his own benefit and signs his 
own name as the maker. (See “Authorized Maker Schemes” flowchart.) The perpetrator in 
these schemes can write and sign fraudulent checks himself. He does not have to alter a pre-
 prepared instrument or forge the maker’s signature.  
 
Overriding Controls Through Intimidation 
When a person is authorized to sign company checks, preparing the checks is easy. The 
employee simply writes and signs the instruments the same way he would with any legitimate 
check. In most situations, check signers are owners, officers, or otherwise high-ranking 
employees, and thus have or can obtain access to all the blank checks they need. Even if 
company policy prohibits check signers from handling blank checks, the perpetrator can 
normally use his influence to overcome this impediment. What employee is going to tell the 
CEO that he can’t have a blank check?   
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.524                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The most basic way an employee accomplishes an authorized maker scheme is to override 
controls designed to prevent fraud. Most authorized signatories have high levels of influence 
within their companies. The perpetrators use this influence to deflect questions about 
fraudulent transactions.  
 
A common authorized maker scheme is one in which a majority owner or sole shareholder 
uses his company as a sort of alter ego, paying personal expenses directly out of company 
accounts. Instead of paying personal expenses, the perpetrator might cut checks directly to 
himself, his friends, or family. Using fear of job security as a weapon, the owner can 
maintain a work environment in which employees are afraid to question these transactions.  
 
High-level managers or officers might also use their authority to override controls in 
companies with absent or inattentive ownership. Intimidation can play a large part in the 
commission and concealment of types of occupational fraud involving powerful individuals.  
 
EXAMPLE 
The manager of a sales office stole approximately $150,000 from his employers over a two-
 year period. This manager had primary check-signing authority and abused this power by 
writing company checks to pay his personal expenses. The manager’s fraudulent activities 
were well known by certain members of his staff, but these employees’ careers were controlled 
by the perpetrator. Fear of losing their jobs combined with lack of a proper whistleblowing 
structure prevented the manager’s employees from reporting his fraud.  
 
Poor Controls 
Although overriding controls is the most blatant way to execute an authorized maker 
scheme, it is not the most common. Far more of these schemes occur because no one is 
paying attention to the accounts and few controls are present to prevent fraud. Some 
employees who write checks to themselves or to purchase items for themselves simply code 
the checks to expense accounts that they know are not likely to be reviewed.  
 
The failure to closely monitor accounts is supplemented by lack of internal controls, 
specifically the absence of separation of duties in the cash disbursements process. 
Employees who commit authorized maker fraud are often in charge of reconciling the bank 
accounts of the business. This is especially common in small businesses. Employees with 
total control over the disbursements process are in a perfect position to write fraudulent 
checks for their own benefit.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.525 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.526                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
The bookkeeper of a medium-sized company was charged with paying all bills and 
preparing the company payroll. She had access to an automatic check signer and total 
control over company bank accounts. The bookkeeper wrote extra checks to herself, coded 
the expenditures to payroll, and destroyed the ca nceled checks when they were returned with 
the bank statement.  
 
Concealing Check Tampering Schemes  
Most check tampering schemes do not consist of a single occurrence but instead continue 
over a period of time. Therefore, concealing the fraud is arguably the most important aspect 
of the scheme. If an employee intended to steal a large sum of money and escape to South 
America, hiding the fraud might not be so important. But the vast majority of occupational 
fraudsters remain employees of their companies as they continue to steal from them, which 
makes concealment the key to the crime.  
 
Concealment of the fraud means not only hiding the identity of the criminal, but in most 
cases hiding the fact that a fraud has even occurred. The most successful frauds are those in 
which the victim organization is unaware that it is being robbed. Obviously, once a business 
learns that it is being victimized it will take steps to staunch its bleeding and the end of the 
scheme will be at hand.  
 
Check tampering schemes can present especially tricky concealment problems for dishonest 
employees. In other types of fraudulent disbursements such as invoice or payroll schemes, 
the fraudulent payment is entered in the books as a legitimate transaction by someone other 
than the perpetrator. The payments in those schemes are generated by the production of 
false documents that cause accounts payable personnel to think that money is owed to a 
particular person or vendor. When accounts payable issues a disbursement for a bogus 
invoice, it does so because it believes the invoice to be genuine. The payment is then entered 
in the books as a legitimate payment. In other words, the perpetrator generally does not have 
to worry about concealing the payment in the books, because someone else unwittingly does 
it for him. But in forgery and authorized maker schemes the perpetrator is the one writing 
the check, and he is usually the one coding the check in the disbursements journal. He must 
“explain” the check on the books.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.527 
Forged endorsement schemes and altered payee schemes are different because they involve 
the alteration of checks that were already prepared and coded by someone else. 
Nevertheless, they create a problem for the perpetrator because the intercepted check was 
intended for a legitimate recipient. Someone is out there waiting for the check that the 
perpetrator has taken. The culprit in these schemes must worry not only about hiding the 
fraud from his employer, but also about appeasing the intended payee.  
 
The Fraudster Reconciling the Bank Statement 
A large percentage of those who perpetrate check tampering frauds are involved in 
reconciling the company’s bank statement. The bank statement that a company receives 
normally includes the canceled checks that have been cashed in the preceding period. A 
person who reconciles the accounts is therefore in a position to hide the existence of any 
fraudulent checks he has written to himself. He can remove the fraudulent checks or doctor 
the bank statement or both. 
 
In forged maker and authorized maker schemes, the perpetrator usually has to code the 
check in the disbursements journal. The most basic way to hide the check is to code it as 
“void” or to include no listing at all in the journal. Then, when the bank statement arrives, 
the perpetrator removes the fraudulent check from the stack of returned checks and destroys 
it. Now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physical evidence of the 
check on hand. Of course, the bank will have  a copy of the check, but unless someone 
questions the missing check it is unlikely that the company will discover the problem. And 
since the perpetrator is the one who reconciles the account, it is unlikely that anyone will 
even notice that the check is missing.  
 
The problem with simply omitting the fraudulent check from the disbursements journal is 
that the bank balance will not reconcile to the book balance. For instance, if the perpetrator 
wrote a $25,000 check to himself and did not record it, then the book balance will be 
$25,000 higher than the bank balance ($25,000  was taken out of the bank account by the 
perpetrator, but was not credited out of the company’s cash account). Employees usually 
omit their illicit checks from the disbursement journal only in situations where they 
personally reconcile the bank statement and no one reviews their work. This allows the 
perpetrator to “force” the reconciliation. In ot her words, the perpetrator reports that the 
bank balance and book balance match, when in fact they do not.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.528                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some victim organizations simply do not regularly reconcile their accounts. This makes it 
easy for employees to write checks without recording them. In a system where controls are 
so lax, almost any concealment method will be effective to disguise fraud. In fact, it may not 
be necessary to make any effort at all to conceal the crime.  
 
Some fraudsters physically alter the bank statement to cause it to match the company’s book 
balance. For instance, a person engaging in a forged maker scheme may decide to steal blank 
checks from the back of the checkbook. These checks are out of sequence and therefore will 
be listed last on the bank statement. This employee can delete the clump of fraudulent 
checks at the end of the statement and alter the balance to match the victim company’s 
books.  
 
Re-Alteration of Checks 
In altered payee schemes, remember that it is common for the perpetrator to take a check 
intended for a legitimate recipient, then doctor the instrument so that the perpetrator 
becomes the designated payee. But a canceled check payable to an employee will obviously 
raise suspicions of fraud. Therefore, some employees re-alter their fraudulent checks when 
the bank statement arrives. It has already been discussed how employees can alter checks by 
writing the payee’s name in erasable ink when the check is prepared. These employees obtain 
a signature for the check, then erase the true payee’s name and insert their own. When the 
fraudulent checks return with the bank statement, the employee erases his own name and re-
 enters the name of the proper payee. Thus there will be no appearance of mischief.  
 
Miscoding Fraudulent Checks 
Rather than omit a fraudulent check from the disbursements journal or list it as void, the 
perpetrator might write a check payable to himself but list a different person as the payee on 
the books. Usually, the fake payee is a regular vendor - a person or business that receives 
numerous checks from the victim company. Employees tend to pick known vendors for 
these schemes because one extra disbursement to a regular payee is less likely to be noticed 
than a check to an unknown person. 
 
The fraudster can also conceal a fraudulent check overstating the amounts of legitimate  
disbursements in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudulent check. For instance, 
assume that a company owes $10,000 to a part icular vendor. The fraudster would write a 
check to the vendor for $10,000, but enter the check in the disbursements journal as a 
$15,000 payment. The company’s disbursements are now overstated by $5,000. The 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.529 
fraudster can write a $5,000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disbursements 
journal. The bank balance and the book balance will still match, because the cost of the 
fraudulent check was absorbed when the amount of the legitimate check was overstated. Of 
course, the fact that the canceled checks do not match the entries in the journal should 
indicate potential fraud. This type of concealment is really only effective when the bank 
accounts are not closely monitored or where the employee is in charge of reconciling the 
accounts.  
 
If possible, employees will try to code their fraudulent checks to existing accounts that are 
rarely reviewed or to accounts that are very active. Most of these checks are coded to 
expense accounts or liability accounts. This particular method can be very effective in 
concealing fraud, particularly when the victim company is not diligent in reconciling its bank 
accounts. For instance, some organizations reconcile their accounts by cross-referencing 
check numbers with the amounts of the checks, but they do not verify that the payee on the 
actual check matches the payee listed in the disbursements journal. These organizations will 
be unable to detect checks that have been coded to the wrong payee in the disbursements 
journal.  
 
Re-Issuing Intercepted Checks 
In intercepted check schemes, the employee faces detection not only through his employer’s 
normal control procedures, but also from the intended recipients of the stolen checks. When 
the real payees do not receive their checks, they are likely to complain. These complaints, in 
turn, could trigger a fraud investigation. One way for an employee to avoid this problem is 
to issue new checks to the intended payees.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable troubleshooter was in char ge of auditing payments to all suppliers, 
reviewing supporting documents, and mailing checks. Every once in a while, she would 
purposely fail to mail a check to a vendor. The vendor, of course, would call accounts 
payable about the late payment and would be told that his invoice had been paid on a 
certain date. Since accounts payable did not have a copy of the canceled check (because the 
fraudster was still holding it), they would call the troubleshooter to research the problem. 
Unfortunately for the company, the troubleshooter was the one who had stolen the check. 
She would tell accounts payable to issue another check to the vendor while she stopped 
payment on the first check. Thus the vendor received his payment. Meanwhile, instead of 
stopping payment on the first check, the troubleshooter deposited it into her own account. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.530                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bogus Supporting Documents 
While some perpetrators attempt to wipe out all traces of their fraudulent disbursements by 
destroying the checks, forcing the bank reconciliation and so on, others opt to justify their 
checks by manufacturing fake support for them. These persons prepare false payment 
vouchers, including false invoices, purchase orders, and/or receiving reports to create an 
appearance of authenticity. This concealment strategy is only practical when the employee 
writes checks payable to someone other than himself (such as an accomplice or a shell 
company). A check made payable to an employee may raise suspicions regardless of any 
supporting documents that he manufactures. 
 
Detection of Check Tampering Schemes 
Account Analysis Through Cut-Off Statements 
Bank cut-off statements should be requested for 10 to 15 days after the closing date of the 
balance sheet. These statements may be used to detect cash fraud during periods between 
monthly bank statements. Cut-off statements are often used by auditors to ensure that 
income and expenses are reported in the proper period. If employees know that at any time 
during the month a cut-off statement may be ordered and reviewed independently, cash 
fraud will be less likely. 
 
A cut-off statement is generally ordered from the bank, delivered unopened to the auditor 
(or outsider), and reconciled. It can be ordered at any time during the accounting cycle. If 
cut-off bank statements are not ordered or received, obtain the following period bank 
statement and perform account analysis and investigation. 
 
Bank Reconciliations 
Copies of the bank reconciliations and account analysis should be obtained along with the 
complete set of bank statements on all checking and savings accounts, as well as certificates 
of deposit and other interest bearing and non-interest bearing accounts. From the 
reconciliations, perform the following tests: 
• Confirm the mathematical accuracy of the reconciliation. 
• Examine the bank statement for possible alterations. 
• Trace the balance on the statement back to the bank cut-off and bank confirmation 
statements. 
• Foot the balance to the company’s ledger. 
                                                          
2 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.531 
• Trace the deposits in transit to the bank cut-off statement to ensure recording in  
proper period. 
• Examine canceled checks and compare to the list of outstanding checks. 
• Sample supporting documentation of checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify supporting documentation on outstanding checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify accuracy of nonoperational-cash or ca sh-equivalent accounts (CDs and other 
investment accounts). Analysis should include the verification of the institution holding 
the funds, interest rate, maturity date, beginning and ending balances, and current period 
activity. Book and bank balances should be compared and any accruals of interest 
analyzed.3 
 
Bank Confirmation  
Another method related to the cut-off statement is the bank confirmation request. Unlike 
the cut-off statement, this detection method is merely a report of the balance in the account 
as of the date requested. This balance should be requested to confirm the statement balance 
as well as any other necessary balance date. If fraud is occurring at the bank reconciliation 
stage, this independent confirmation may prove to be very helpful. 
 
Check-Tampering Red Flags 
The following irregularities may indicate fraud:  
• Voided checks may indicate employees have embezzled cash and charged the 
embezzlement to expense accounts. When the expense is paid (from accounts payable), 
fraudulent checks are marked and entered as void and removed from distribution points. 
An account-balancing journal entry is then made. The list of voided checks should be 
verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank statements should be reviewed to 
ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
• Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
• Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be 
closely scrutinized. Such an examination may indicate other schemes such as conflicts of 
interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense reimbursements. 
• Altered endorsements or dual endorsements of returned checks may indicate possible 
tampering.  
  
                                                          
3 Id. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.532                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Returned checks with obviously forged or questionable signature endorsements should 
be verified with original payee.  
• Altered payees on returned checks should be verified with intended payee. 
• Duplicate or counterfeit checks indicate fraud. These checks may be traceable to 
depositor through bank check coding.  
• Questionable deposit dates should be matched to the corresponding customer accounts. 
• An examination of all cash advances may reveal that not all advances are properly 
documented and, therefore, inappropriate payments have been made to employees. 
• Customer complaints regarding payments not being applied to their accounts should be 
investigated. 
• A questionable payee or payee address on a check should trigger review of the 
corresponding check and support documentation. 
 
Prevention of Check Tampering Schemes  
Check Disbursement Controls 
The following list of activities will help tighten controls and possibly deter employees from 
giving in to the temptation to commit check fraud. 
• Check “cutting” and preparation is not done by a signatory on the account.  
• Checks are mailed immediately after signing. 
• Theft control procedures are adhered to (see below). 
• Accounts payable records and addresses are secure from possible tampering. Changes in 
vendor information should be verified. 
• Bank statements should be reviewed diligently ensuring that amounts and signatures 
have not been altered. 
• Bank reconciliations should be completed immediately after monthly statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented 
within 30 days from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable.  
• Bank reconciliations are not made by signatories on the account.  
• Bank statements should be reconciled and reviewed by more than one person.  
• Appropriate separation of duties should be documented and adhered to. 
• Detailed comparisons are routinely made between check payees and the payees listed in 
the cash disbursement journal. 
• Personnel responsible for handling and coding checks are periodically rotated, keeping 
total personnel involved to a minimum. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.533 
Bank-Assisted Controls 
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud. Consider 
the following control measures that may be taken in regard to a firm’s checking accounts.  
• Establish maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
• Use positive pay banking controls. Positive pay allows a company and its bank to work 
together to detect fraudulent items presented for payment. The company provides the 
bank with a list of checks and amounts that are written each day. The bank verifies items 
presented for payment against the company’s lis t. The bank rejects items that are not on 
the list. Investigations are conducted as to the origin of “nonlist” items. 
 
Physical Tampering Prevention 
The following list details check-tampering prevention techniques that are being used today, 
by some institutions, to secure businesses’ check integrity. These methods can be used 
individually or in combination.  
• Signature line void safety band — The word VOID appears on the check when 
photocopied. 
• Rainbow foil bar — A horizontal colored bar placed on the check fades and is shaded 
from one bar to the next. Photocopied foil bars appear solid. 
• Holographic safety border — Holographic images are created in a way that reflect light to 
reveal a three-dimensional graphic. 
• Embossed pearlescent numbering—Checks are numbered using a technique that is 
revealed by a colored highlighter pen or by a bright light held behind the check. 
• Other chemical voids—Checks reveal an image or the word VOID when treated with an 
eradicator chemical. 
• Micro line printing — Extremely small print is too small to read with the naked eye and 
becomes distorted when photocopied. 
• High resolution microprinting—Images are produced on the check in high resolution, 
2,400 dots per inch or higher. This technique is very difficult to reproduce. 
• Security inks—Checks contain inks that react with eradication chemicals, reducing a 
forger’s ability to modify the check. 
• Chrome coloring — The use of chrome-like coloring deters photocopying even with 
color copiers. The chrome pattern or numbering develops solid black. 
• Watermark backers — Hidden images can only be  seen when the check is held at an 
angle. This image is very difficult to reproduce. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.534                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Ultraviolet ink — This ink displays an image or message when held under ultraviolet 
lighting. 
 
Check Theft Control Procedures 
It is very important to provide internal controls that will minimize the possibility of check 
tampering and theft. Below is a list of items that should be incorporated into companies’ 
policies and procedures to help deter check tampering.  
• New checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers. 
• Unused checks should be stored in a secure area such as a safe, vault, or other locked 
area. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel only. Routinely 
change keys and access codes to storage areas. 
• Review all hiring procedures. One of the most  important means of fighting fraud is to 
not hire people with questionable backgrounds. Develop a distinct separation of duties 
in the accounts payable department, including written policies and procedures for all 
personnel who have the opportunity to handle checks, from mailroom clerks to the 
CEO.  
• Use electronic payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments, 
eliminating the use of paper checks. 
• Report lost or stolen checks immediately. 
• Properly and securely store canceled checks. 
• Destroy unused checks for accounts that have been closed.  
• Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing. 
 
 
Billing Schemes 
The asset misappropriation schemes discussed up to this point—skimming, larceny, register 
schemes, and check tampering—all require the perpetrator of the scheme to physically take 
cash or checks from his employer. The next three sections will cover a different kind of asset 
misappropriation scheme, one which allows the perpetrator to misappropriate company 
funds without ever actually handling cash or checks while at work. These succeed by making 
a false claim for payment upon the victim organization. This group consists of billing schemes  
(which attack the purchasing function of a company), payroll schemes, and expense reimbursement 
schemes. The most common of these is the billing scheme.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.535 
Billing schemes are a popular form of employee fraud mainly because they offer the 
prospect of large rewards. Since the majority of most businesses’ disbursements are made in 
the purchasing cycle, larger thefts can be hidden through false-billing schemes than through 
other kinds of fraudulent disbursements. There are three principal types of billing schemes: 
false invoicing via shell companies, false invoicing via non-accomplice vendors, and personal 
purchases made with company funds.  
 
Invoicing Via Shell Companies 
Forming a Shell Company 
Shell companies are fictitious entities created for the purpose of committing fraud. They may 
be nothing more than a fabricated name and a post office box that an employee uses to 
collect disbursements from false billings. However, since the checks received will be made 
out in the name of the shell company, the perpetrator will normally also set up a bank 
account in his new company’s name, so he can deposit and cash the fraudulent checks. (See 
“False Billings from Shell Companies” flowchart.) 
 
A person will probably have to present a bank with a certificate of incorporation or an 
assumed-name certificate in order to open a bank account for a shell company. These are 
documents that a company must obtain through a state or local government. The documents 
can be forged, but it is more likely that the perpetrator will simply file the requisite 
paperwork and obtain legitimate documents from his state or county. This can usually be 
accomplished for a small fee, the cost of which will be more than offset by a successful fraud 
scheme.  
 
If it is discovered that a vendor is falsely billing a company, investigators for the victim 
company may be able to identify the owner of the suspect company by reviewing its business 
registration filings, which are a matter of public record.  
 
To avoid being detected through a records search, some perpetrators form their shell 
companies under another name. It is common, for instance, for employees to set up shell 
companies in the name of a spouse or other close relative. Male fraudsters often establish 
shell companies under their wives’ maiden names. An employee might also form the 
company under a completely fictitious name. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.536                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.537 
EXAMPLE 
An employee used a coworker’s identification to form a shell vendor. The fraudster then 
proceeded to bill his employer  for approximately $20,000 in false services. The resulting 
checks were deposited in the account of the shell company and currency was withdrawn from 
the account through an ATM.  
 
Another issue involved in forming a shell company is the entity’s address—the place where 
fraudulent checks will be collected. Often, an employee rents a post office box and lists it as 
the mailing address of his shell company. Some employees list their home address instead. A 
comparison of employee addresses to vendor addresses might reveal shell companies in an 
accounts payable system.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department head set up a dummy company us ing his residence as the mailing address. 
Over a two-year period, this man submitted over $250,000 worth of false invoices. 
Eventually, the scheme was detected by a newly hired clerk. The clerk was processing an 
invoice when she noticed that the address of the vendor was the same as her boss’s address. 
(By a lucky coincidence, the clerk had typed a personal letter for her boss earlier that day 
and remembered his address.) Had the department head used a P.O. box instead of his 
home address on the invoices, his scheme might have continued indefinitely. 
 
Employees often use their home addresses to collect fraudulent disbursements because 
many businesses are wary of sending checks to vendors that have a post office box for a 
mailing address. Other common collection sites for shell company schemes are the addresses 
of relatives, friends, or accomplices.  
 
Submitting False Invoices 
Once a shell company has been formed and a bank account has been opened, the corrupt 
employee begins billing his employer. Invoices can be manufactured by various means such 
as a professional printer, a personal computer, or a typewriter. False invoices do not always 
have to be of professional quality to generate fraudulent disbursements. Typewritten 
invoices are often sufficient to generate checks.  
 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.538                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Self-Approval of Fraudulent Invoices 
The difficulty in a shell company scheme is not usually in producing the invoices, but in 
getting the victim organization to pay them. Authorization for the fictitious purchase (and 
therefore payment of the bill) is the key. In a large percentage of shell company cases, the 
perpetrator is in a position to approve payment on the very invoices he is fraudulently 
submitting. It is obvious the duties of preparing and approving vouchers should be separated 
to avoid this kind of scheme. 
 
In companies where a proper separation of duties exists, the employee with approval 
authority sometimes creates fraudulent vouchers or purchase orders and forges the signature 
of the person who is in charge of preparing these documents. Then the perpetrator approves 
payment on the fraudulent vouchers he has generated. This makes it appear that two 
employees have signed off on the voucher as mandated by the victim organization’s 
controls.  
 
Not all companies require the completion of payment vouchers before they will issue checks. 
In some enterprises, checks are written based on less formal procedures, such as the 
submission of “check requests.” These requests simply list the name of the payee, the 
amount to be paid, and a brief narrative stating the reason for the check. Obviously, this is 
not a very sound procedure for preventing fraud. Dishonest employees have little trouble 
running shell company schemes in organizations that operate this way.  
 
“Rubber Stamp” Supervisors  
If an employee cannot authorize payments himself, the next best thing is if the person who 
has that authority is inattentive or overly trusting. “Rubber stamp” supervisors like this are 
destined to be targeted by unethical employees. In some cases, supervisors are attentive to 
the purchase orders they are asked to authorize, but they lack the technical knowledge to 
spot fraud as it is happening. For instance, a manager or administrator might not completely 
understand the costs associated with upgrading computer software to modernize a work 
area. This manager will have to rely on his subordinates who have the necessary technical 
expertise to determine that costs are being kept in line. The subordinates may be able to take 
advantage of this situation to cause the company to overpay for the equipment required to 
upgrade the system.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.539 
Reliance on False Documents  
When an employee does not have approval authority for purchases and does not have the 
benefit of a rubber stamp supervisor, he must run his vouchers through the normal accounts 
payable process. The success of this kind of scheme will depend on the apparent authenticity 
of the false voucher he creates. If the perpetrator can generate purchase orders and receiving 
reports that corroborate the information on the fraudulent invoice from his shell company, 
he can fool accounts payable into issuing a check. 
 
Collusion 
Collusion among several employees is sometimes used to overcome well-designed internal 
controls. For example, in a company with proper separation of duties, the functions of 
purchasing goods or services, authorizing the purchase, receiving the goods or services, and 
making the payment to the vendor should all be separated. If this process is strictly adhered 
to, it will be extremely difficult for any single employee to commit a false-billing scheme. But 
if several employees work together, they can overcome the internal controls of their 
employer.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A warehouse foreman and a parts ordering clerk conspired to purchase approximately 
$300,000 of nonexistent supplies. The parts ordering clerk would initiate the false 
transactions by obtaining approval to place orders for parts he claimed were needed. The 
orders were then sent to a vendor who, acting in conjunction with the two employee 
fraudsters, prepared false invoices, which were sent to the victim company. Meanwhile, the 
warehouse foreman verified receipt of the fi ctitious shipments of incoming supplies. The 
perpetrators were therefore able to compile complete vouchers for the fraudulent purchases 
without overstepping their normal duties.  
 
Even if all internal controls are observed, at some point a company must rely on its 
employees to be honest. One of the purposes of separating duties is to prevent any one 
person from having too much control over a particular business function. It provides a built-in 
monitoring mechanism where every person’s actions are in some way verified by another 
person. But if everyone is corrupt, even proper controls will not prevent fraud.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.540                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Purchases of Services Rather than Goods   
Most shell company schemes involve the purchase of services rather than goods. The 
primary reason for this is that services are not tangible. If an employee sets up a shell 
company to make fictitious sales of goods to his employer, these goods will obviously never 
arrive. By comparing its purchases to its inventory levels, the victim organization might 
detect the fraud. It is much more difficult, on the other hand, for the victim organization to 
verify that the services were never rendered. For this reason, many employees involved in 
shell company schemes bill their employers for things like “consulting services.” 
 
Pass-Through Schemes 
In most shell company schemes, victim organizations are billed for completely fictitious 
purchases of goods or services. However, there is a subcategory of shell-company schemes 
in which actual goods or services are sold to the victim company. These are known as pass-through 
schemes.  
 
Pass-through schemes are usually undertaken by employees in charge of purchasing on 
behalf of the victim company. Instead of buying merchandise directly from a vendor, the 
employee sets up a shell company and purchases the merchandise through that fictitious 
entity. He then resells the merchandise to his employer from the shell company at an  
inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department director was put in charge of purchasing computer equipment. Because of his 
expertise on the subject and his high standing within the company, he was unsupervised in 
this task. The director set up  a shell company in another state and bought used computers 
through the shell company, then turned around and sold them to his employer at a greatly 
exaggerated price. The money from the victim company’s first installment on the computers 
was used to pay the shell company’s debts to the real vendors. Subsequent payments were 
profits for the bogus company. The scheme cost the victim company over $1 million.  
 
Invoicing Via Nonaccomplice Vendors 
Pay-and-Return Schemes 
Instead of using shell companies in their overbilling schemes, some employees generate 
fraudulent disbursements by using the invoices of legitimate third-party vendors who are not 
a part of the fraud scheme. In a pay-and-return  scheme, an employee intentionally mishandles 
payments that are owed to legitimate vendors. (See “Pay and Return Schemes” flowchart.) 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.541 
One way to do this is to purposely double-p ay an invoice. For instance, a clerk might 
intentionally pay an invoice twice, then call the vendor and request that one of the checks be 
returned. The clerk then intercepts the returned check.  
 
Another way to accomplish a pay-and-return scheme is to intentionally pay the wrong 
vendor. In this type of scheme an employee sends Vendor A’s check to  Vendor B. After the 
checks are mailed, the employee calls the vendors to explain the “mistake” and requests that 
they return the checks to his attention. When the checks arrive, the employee converts them 
and keeps the money. The employee usually runs the vouchers through the accounts payable 
system a second time so that the vendors eventually get their money.  
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.542                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An employee might also pay the proper vendor, but intentionally overpay him. Once again, 
the employee contacts the vendor, this time to request that the excess payment be returned. 
Finally, an employee might intentionally purchase excess merchandise, return the excess, and 
pocket the refund.  
 
Overbilling with a Nonaccomplice Vendor’s Invoices 
In most instances where an employee creates fraudulent invoices to overbill his employer, he 
uses a shell company. It is not as common for an employee to submit the invoice of an 
existing vendor. Nevertheless, in some instances an employee will undertake such a scheme 
by altering an existing vendor’s invoice or by  creating a counterfeit copy of a vendor’s 
invoice form.  
 
Personal Purchases With Company Funds  
Instead of undertaking billing schemes to generate cash, many fraudsters simply purchase 
personal items with their company’s money. Company accounts are used to buy items for 
employees, their businesses, their families, and so on.  
 
Personal Purchases Through False Invoicing 
Employees who undertake purchases schemes may do so by running unsanctioned invoices 
through the accounts payable system. The perpetrator in this type of scheme buys an item 
and submits the bill to his employer as if it represented a legitimate company expense. The 
victim company ends up unknowingly buying goods or services for a dishonest employee. 
(See “Invoice Purchasing Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
THE FRAUDSTER AS AUTHORIZER OF INVOICES 
The person who engages in a purchases scheme is often the very person in the company 
whose duties include authorizing  purchases. Obviously, proper controls should preclude 
anyone from approving his own purchases. Such poorly separated functions leave little other 
than his conscience to dissuade an employee from fraud. Fraud arises in part because of a 
perceived opportunity. An employee who sees that no one is reviewing his actions is more 
likely to turn to fraud than one who knows his company works diligently to detect employee 
theft.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.543 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a remote location of a large, publicly traded company was authorized to 
order supplies and approve vend or invoices for payment. For over a year, the manager 
routinely added personal items and supplies for his own business to orders made on behalf 
of his employer. The orders often included a strange mix of items. For instance, technical 
supplies and home furnishings might be purchased in the same order. Because the manager 
was in a position to approve his own purcha ses, he could get away with such blatantly 
obvious frauds. In addition to ordering personal items, the perpetrator changed the delivery 
address for certain supplies so that they would be delivered directly to his home or side 
business. This scheme cost the victim comp any approximately $300,000 in unnecessary 
purchases.  
 
In some situations, the perpetrator is authorized to approve purchases, but controls prevent 
him from also initiating purchase requests. This procedure is supposed to prevent an 
employee from purchasing personal items with company funds. Unfortunately, those with 
authority to approve purchases often have a good deal of control over their subordinates. 
These persons can use their influence to force subordinates to assist in purchases schemes. 
In other cases, the manager might simply initiate the purchase order himself by forging the 
subordinate’s signature.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Purchases for under $1,000 at a certain utility company could be made with limited value 
purchase orders (LPOs), which required the signatures of two people: the originator of a 
purchase request and the approver of the request. An LPO attached to an invoice for less 
than $1,000 would be paid by the accounts payable department. In this case, a manager 
bought goods and services on company accounts, and prepared LPOs for the purchases. (In 
some cases, the LPO would falsely describe the item to conceal the natu re of the purchase.) 
Once the LPO was prepared, the manager forced a clerk in his department to sign the 
document as the originator of  the transaction. The clerk, in timidated by her boss, did not 
question the authenticity of the LPOs. With two signatures affixed, the LPO appeared to 
be legitimate and the bills were paid. The sche me cost the victim company at least $25,000. 
 
FALSE PURCHASE REQUISITIONS 
If an employee does not have purchasing authority, he may get approval for a fraudulent 
purchase by misrepresenting the nature of the acquisition. In many companies, those with 
the power to authorize purchases are not always attentive to their duties. If a trusted 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.544                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subordinate says that the company needs to buy a certain item or items, busy supervisors 
often give rubber stamp approval to the purchase requisition. Additionally, employees 
sometimes misrepresent the nature of the items they are purchasing in order to pass a 
cursory review by their superiors.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An engineer bought over $30,000 worth of personal items. The engineer dealt directly with 
vendors and was also in charge of overseeing the receipt of the materials he purchased. He 
was therefore able to misrepresent the nature of the merchandise he bought, listing it as 
“maintenance items.” Vendor invoices were altered to agree to this description.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.545 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.546                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the perpetrator falsifies his purchase requisition in this manner, the fraud should be 
detected when delivery occurs. For example, if the purchase requisition says “maintenance 
items” but the vendor delivers home furnishings, it will be obvious that the perpetrator has 
committed fraud. The problem of delivery can be avoided if the perpetrator is in charge of 
receiving incoming shipments. He can verify that delivery of “maintenance items” was 
received. This is a breach of separation of duties, but unfortunately, it is fairly common for 
purchasing agents to verify delivery of their own orders. Even if the victim organization 
enforces a centralized delivery point, the perpetrator might enlist the aid of an accomplice in 
the receiving department to falsify the organization’s receiving reports.  
 
Another way to avoid detection at the delivery stage is to change the delivery address for 
purchases. Instead of being shipped to the victim organization, the items that the employee 
buys are sent directly to his home or business. The perpetrator might also order the goods 
drop shipped to a remote location.  
 
Personal Purchases on Credit Cards or Other Company Accounts  
Instead of running false invoices through accounts payable, some employees make personal 
purchases on company credit cards or on running accounts with vendors. (See “Purchases 
on Credit Card or Company Account” flowchar t.) Unlike invoicing schemes, prior approval 
for these purchases is not required. An employee with a company credit card can buy an 
item merely by signing his name (or forging someone else’s) at the time of purchase. Later 
review of the credit card statement, however, may detect the fraudulent purchase. 
Unfortunately, many high-level employees approve their own credit card expenses, making it 
very easy to carry out a purchasing scheme. 
 
Of course, only certain employees are authorized to use company credit cards. Employees 
without this privilege can only make fraudulent purchases with a company card if they first 
manage to get hold of one. To this end, company cards are sometimes stolen or “borrowed” 
from authorized users.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.547 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.548                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An accountant falsely added her name to a list of employees to whom cards were to be 
issued. She used her card to make fraudulent purchases, but forged the signatures of 
authorized cardholders to cover her tracks. Since no one knew she even had a company 
card, she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someone questioned the 
purchases. For over five years this employee continued her scheme, racking up a six figure 
bill on her employer’s account. In addition, she had control of the credit card statement and 
was able to code her purchases to various expense accounts, thereby further delaying 
detection of her crime. 
 
Another way to conceal a credit card purchasing scheme is to doctor the credit card 
statement so that fraudulent purchases do not show up. Some employees go so far as to 
destroy the real credit card statement and produce counterfeit copies on which their 
fraudulent purchases are omitted.  
 
Returning Merchandise for Cash 
The fraudulent purchases schemes discussed to this point have all involved false purchases 
of merchandise for the sake of obtaining the merchandise. In some cases, however, an 
employee buys items and then returns them for cash.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made fraudulent gains from a business travel account. The employee’s scheme 
began by purchasing tickets for herself and her family through her company’s travel budget. 
Poor separation of duties allowed the fraudster to order the tickets, receive them, prepare 
claims for payments, and distribute checks. The only review of her activities was made by a 
busy and rather uninterested supervisor who approved the employee’s claims without 
requiring support documentation. Eventually, the employee’s scheme evolved. She began to 
purchase airline tickets and return them for their cash value. An employee of the travel 
agency assisted in the scheme by encoding the tickets as though the fraudster had paid for 
them herself. That caused the airlines to pay refunds directly to the fraudster rather than to 
her employer. In the course of two years, this employee embezzled over $100,000 through 
her purchases scheme.  
 
Detection of Billing Schemes 
Because there are many variations of purchasing fraud schemes, there are also several 
detection methods. Detection methods are most effective when used in combinations. Each 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.549 
detection method is likely to point out anomalies that can then be investigated further to 
determine if a fraud scheme has occurred or is currently underway. Additionally, the 
detection methods will point out the weaknesses in internal controls and alert the auditor to 
potential opportunities for future fraud schemes. 
 
Analytical Review 
A review of the various general ledger accounts might reveal unusual or unexpected events. 
These events could be undetected purchasing fraud. For example, a comparison of inventory 
purchases in relationship to net sales might indicate that purchases are too high or too low 
for that level of sales. This might be a “red flag,” indicating excess purchasing schemes or 
fictitious sales schemes, respectively. 
 
Another analytical method uses a comparison of the inventory purchases of prior years with 
those of the current year. This comparison might indicate that an overbilling scheme or a 
duplicate-payment scheme is in progress. 
 
Analyses such as those described above can be performed for any acquisition of goods or 
services of a company. Analytical reviews are most effective in detecting fraud schemes that 
are large, such that the anomalies will be apparent. Other detection methods are more 
effective for fraud schemes that are smaller in relationship to the financial statements taken 
as a whole. Regardless of fraud size, examination of source documentation will be necessary. 
When an anomaly is detected, further investigation is required, which will demand an 
examination of source documentation. 
 
Computer-Assisted Analytical Review 
The computer can assist the auditor in determining the presence of unusual patterns in the 
acquisition or purchasing function. The computer can provide the auditor with a matrix of 
the purchasing activity to determine the presence of unusual patterns. An analysis of the 
following data might uncover purchasing schemes, such as: 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.550                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FRAUD SCHEME DETECTION METHOD 
Fictitious vendors Vendors and employees with matching addresses  
More than one vendor with the same address  
Vendors with only post office box addresses 
Overbilling 
 
Unusual, or “one-time,” extra charges  
Conflict of interest Vendors with employees who are employee family members 
An unusually high occurrence of complaints  
Complaints about specific vendors 
Higher prices and/or substandard quality 
 
Statistical Sampling 
As with inventory, the source documentation for purchases can be statistically sampled and 
examined for irregularities. Statistical samples can be drawn to test specific attributes. This 
detection method is particularly effective if a single attribute is suspected, such as fictitious 
vendors. A listing of all post office box addresses might reveal fictitious vendors. 
 
Vendor or Outsider Complaints 
Fraudulent schemes will often unravel because a vendor or other outsider complains to the 
employer or company. Complaints from customers, vendors, and others are good detection 
tools that can lead the fraud examiner to further inquiry. 
 
Site Visits — Observation 
A site visit will often reveal much about the internal control, or lack thereof, for any 
location. The observation of how the accounting transactions are actually transcribed will 
sometimes alert the fraud examiner to potential problem areas. 
 
Sample Audit Program 
The following audit program may be beneficial in detecting red flags to billing schemes: 
• Does the company have a purchasing department? If yes, is it independent of (1) the 
accounting department, (2) the receiving department, or (3) the shipping department? 
• Are purchases made only after the respective department heads sign purchase 
requisitions? 
• Are purchases made by means of purchase orders sent to vendors for all purchases or 
only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantity, price, terms, delivery 
requirements, and dates? 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.551 
• Is a list of unfilled purchase orders maintained and reviewed periodically? 
• Are purchase order forms prenumbered and is the sequence accounted for periodically? 
• Does the client maintain an approved vendors list? 
• Are items purchased only after competitive bids are obtained? If so, are competitive bids 
obtained for all purchases or only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Is a log maintained of all receipts? 
• Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? If yes, 
are receiving reports (1) prepared for all items, (2) prepared only for items that have 
purchase orders, or (3) renumbered? 
• At the time the items are received, does someone independent of the purchasing 
department check the merchandise before acceptance as to description, quantity,  
and condition? 
• Are copies of receiving reports (1) furnished to the accounting department, (2) furnished 
to the purchasing department, or (3) filed in the receiving department? 
• Are receipts under blanket purchase orders monitored, and are quantities exceeding 
authorized total returned to the vendor? 
• Are procedures adequate for the proper accounting for partial deliveries of  
purchase orders? 
• Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions? 
• Are vendors’ invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related 
liability is recorded? 
• Are invoices checked as to prices, extensions, footings, freight charges, allowances, and 
credit terms? 
• Are controls adequate to ensure that all available discounts are taken? 
• Are purchases recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed 
through cash disbursements? 
• Does a responsible employee assign the appropriate general ledger account distribution 
to which the invoices are to be posted? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that invoices have been processed before payment 
and to prevent duplicate payment (e.g., a block stamp)? 
• Does a responsible official approve invoices for payment? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to 
customers is promptly billed to the customers and recorded as both a receivable and  
a payable? 
• Are records of goods returned to vendors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.552                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are unmatched receiving reports, purchase orders, and vendors’ invoices periodically 
reviewed and investigated for proper recording? 
• Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts? 
• Are statements from vendors regularly reviewed and reconciled against recorded 
liabilities? 
• Do adjustments to accounts payable (e.g., writing off of debit balances) require the 
approval of a designated official? 
• Are budgets used? If yes, are bu dgets approved by responsible officials, and are actual 
expenditures compared with budgeted amounts and variances analyzed and explained? 
• If excess inventory purchasing is suspected, verify that all inventory purchased was 
received (receiving report) at the proper location. An examination of receiving reports or 
invoices might reveal alternate shipping sites. 
 
Prevention of Billing Schemes 
The preventing of purchasing fraud can be especially difficult. Purchasing personnel are 
often held to a different standard than other employees of a company. For example, sales 
people often are given inducements or perquisites in order to persuade potential customers. 
These same inducements are offered to the purchasing personnel of the company from the 
company’s vendors. And yet, the company ex pects the purchasing personnel to perform 
their function without bias and to make decisions that are in the best interest of the 
company, without regard to the inducements offered by suppliers. Additionally, the 
personnel involved in the purchasing and payment functions are generally not compensated 
on a basis commensurate with their performance, as are salespeople. Therefore, there is a 
reverse incentive to perform in the best interest of the company. 
 
Probably the most effective purchasing fraud prevention measure is education (training) of 
the purchasing and payable personnel. The second most effective purchasing fraud 
prevention measure is an objective compensation arrangement with people responsible for 
purchasing decisions. 
 
Education (Training) 
Purchasing personnel should be trained thoroughly in ethical situations. The National 
Association of Purchasing Management has a code of ethics for its Certified Purchasing 
Managers. As a deterrent to fraud, companies might consider enrollment and certification. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.553 
Compensation 
People responsible for the purchasing decisions (buyers) should be paid well enough to 
reduce the motive and rationalization for fraud. Auditors can examine the compensation of 
purchasers and determine if any buyers were recently passed over for raises. This might be 
an indication of discontent that could lead to the formation of a fraudulent scheme against 
the employer. 
 
Proper Documentation 
Proper documentation for purchasing should include prenumbered and controlled purchase 
requisitions, purchase orders, receiving reports, and checks. 
 
Proper Approvals 
Before adding a vendor to the list, there should be an investigation of the “proposed” 
vendor, performed by someone other than the personnel in purchasing and accounts 
payable. If a vendor number is required before payment is made and the personnel 
responsible for the investigation assigns the vendor that identification number, then the 
buyer cannot place fictitious vendors on the list. Large or unusual purchases should be 
approved by someone independent of the purchasing department. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
For the best results and accountability, each company sufficient in size should have a 
separate purchasing department. Regardless of the company size, the purchasing function 
should be separate from the payment function. 
 
Hotlines 
Companies should study the feasibility of installing hotlines to provide a forum for 
complaints by employees and outsiders. 
 
Competitive Bidding 
Ensure that bid policies and procedures are thoroughly reviewed. Whenever possible, 
enforce competitive bidding. After the bidding process has been completed, a questionnaire 
can be sent to successful and unsuccessful bidders. This questionnaire can reveal areas to not 
only make the bidding process more effective but it also can provide a forum for bidders to 
express concerns over questionable or fraudulent activities. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.554                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Prevention Checklist 
The following is a list of billing scheme prevention methods that may be helpful in the 
deterrence of billing fraud: 
• Authorization procedures of purchase orders, invoicing, and payments should be 
documented and adhered to. 
• The accounts payable list of vendors should be periodically reviewed for strange vendors 
and addresses. 
• Payment codings should be reviewed for abnormal descriptions. 
• Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels on both a monthly and yearly 
basis. 
• Purchases and inventory levels should be compared and analyzed. (See Inventory and 
Other Assets). 
• Control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers should be 
in place. 
• A separation of duties between authorization, purchasing, receiving, shipping, and 
accounting should be in place. 
• Payment of vouchers should be periodically reviewed to ensure integrity of proper 
documentation. 
• Receiving and shipping reports should be reviewed for completeness and accuracy. 
• Asset information should include purchasing trails and other information. 
• Journal entries to inventory accounts should be strictly scrutinized. 
• Appropriate bank reconciliation and review procedures should be performed 
periodically, checking for out-of-place vendors and endorsements. 
• Credit card statements should be reviewed often for irregularities. 
• The validity of invoices with a post office box address should be verified. 
• Proper controls for the receipt and handling of “return to sender” checks should be 
installed. 
 
 
Payroll Fraud 
Payroll schemes are similar to billing schemes. The perpetrators of these frauds produce 
false documents, which cause the victim company to unknowingly make a fraudulent 
disbursement. In billing schemes, the false document is usually an invoice (coupled, perhaps, 
with false receiving reports, purchase orders, and purchase authorizations). In payroll 
schemes, the perpetrator typically falsifies a timecard or alters information in the payroll 
records. The major difference between payroll schemes and billing schemes is that payroll 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.555 
frauds involve disbursements to employees rather than to external parties. The most 
common payroll frauds are ghost employee schemes, falsified hours and salary schemes, and 
commission schemes.  
 
Ghost Employees 
The term ghost employee  refers to someone on the payroll who does not actually work for the 
victim company. Through the falsification of personnel or payroll records a fraudster causes 
paychecks to be generated to a ghost. The fraudster or an accomplice then converts these 
paychecks. (See “Ghost Employees” flowchart.) The ghost employee may be a fictitious 
person or a real individual who simply does not work for the victim employer. When the 
ghost is a real person, it is often a friend or relative of the perpetrator.  
 
In order for a ghost employee scheme to work, four things must happen: (1) the ghost must 
be added to the payroll, (2) timekeeping and wage rate information must be collected, (3) a 
paycheck must be issued to the ghost, and (4) the check must be delivered to the perpetrator 
or an accomplice.  
 
Adding the Ghost to the Payroll  
The first step in a ghost employee scheme is entering the ghost on the payroll. In some 
businesses, all hiring is done through a centralized personnel department, while in others the 
personnel function is spread over the managerial responsibilities of various departments. 
Regardless of how hiring of new employees is handled within a business, it is the person or 
persons with authority to add new employees and remove terminated employees that are in 
the best position to put ghosts on the payroll.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager who was responsible for hiring and scheduling janitorial work added over 80 
ghost employees to his payroll. The ghosts in this case were actual people who worked at 
other jobs for different companies. The manager filled out time sheets for the fictitious 
employees and authorized them, then took the resulting paychecks to the ghost employees, 
who cashed them and split the proceeds with the manager. It was this manager’s authority 
in the hiring and supervision of employees that enabled him to perpetrate this fraud.  
 
Employees in payroll accounting also sometimes create ghost employees. In a perfect world, 
every name listed on the payroll would be verified against personnel records to make sure 
that those persons receiving paychecks actually work for the company, but in practice this 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.556                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not always happen. Thus, persons in payroll accounting may be able to create fictitious 
employees by simply adding a new name to the payroll records. Access to these records is 
usually restricted, with only high-level employees having the ability to make changes to the 
payroll. These persons would therefore be among the most likely suspects in a ghost 
employee scheme. On the other hand, lower level employees sometimes gain access to 
restricted payroll information and should not be disregarded as possible suspects. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee in the payroll department was gi ven the authority to enter new employees into 
the payroll system, make corrections to payroll information, and distribute paychecks. This 
employee’s manager gave rubber-stamp approval to the employee’s actions because of a 
trusting relationship between the two. The lack of separation of duties and the absence of 
review made it simple for the culprit to add a fictitious employee into the payroll system.  
 
One way perpetrators try to conceal the presence of a ghost on the payroll is to create a 
ghost with a name very similar to that of a real employee. The name on the fraudulent 
paycheck, then, will appear to be legitimate to anyone who glances at it. For instance, if a 
victim organization has an employee named John Doe, the ghost may be named “John 
Doer.”   
 
Instead of adding new names to the payroll, some employees undertake ghost employee 
schemes when they fail to remove the names of terminated employees. Paychecks to the 
terminated employee continue to be generated even though the employee no longer works 
for the victim organization. The perpetrator intercepts these fraudulent paychecks and 
converts them to his own use.  
 
Collecting Timekeeping Information 
The second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issued to a ghost employee, 
at least in the case of hourly employees, is the collection and computation of timekeeping 
information. The perpetrator must provide payroll accounting with a timecard or other 
instrument showing how many hours the fictitious employee worked over the most recent 
pay period. This information, along with the wage rate information contained in personnel 
or payroll files, will be used to compute the amount of the fraudulent paycheck.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.557 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.558                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Timekeeping records can be maintained in a variety of ways. Employees might manually 
record their hours on timecards or punch time clocks that record the time at which a person 
starts and finishes his work. In more sophisticated environments, computer systems can 
track an employee’s hours.  
 
When a ghost employee scheme is in place, someone must create documentation for the 
ghost’s hours. This essentially amounts to preparing a fake timecard showing when the ghost 
was allegedly present at work. Depending upon the normal procedure for recording hours, a 
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost’s name, punch the time 
clock for the ghost, and so on. The preparing of the timecard is not a great obstacle to the 
perpetrator. The real key is obtaining approval of the timecard.  
 
A supervisor should approve the timecards of hourly employees before paychecks are issued. 
This verifies to the payroll department that the employee actually worked the hours that are 
claimed on the card. A ghost employee, by definition, does not work for the victim 
organization, so approval will have to be fraudulently obtained. Often, the supervisor 
himself is the one who creates the ghost. When this is the case, the supervisor fills out a 
timecard in the name of the ghost, then affixes his own approval. The timecard is thereby 
authenticated and a paycheck will be issued. When a nonsupervisor is committing a ghost 
employee scheme, he will typically forge the necessary approval, then forward the bogus 
timecard directly to payroll accounting, bypassing his supervisor.  
 
In computerized systems, a supervisor’s signature might not be required. In lieu of this, the 
supervisor inputs data into the payroll system and the use of his password serves to 
authorize the entry. If an employee has access to the supervisor’s password, he can input 
data for the ghost, which will appear in the payroll system with a seal of approval.  
If the perpetrator creates ghosts who are salaried rather than hourly employees, it is not 
necessary to collect timekeeping information. Salaried employees are paid a certain amount 
each pay period regardless of how many hours they work. Because the timekeeping function 
can be avoided, it may be easier for a perpetrator to create a ghost employee who works on 
salary. However, most businesses have fewer salaried employees and they are more likely to 
be members of management. The salaried ghost may therefore be more difficult to conceal. 
 
Issuing the Ghost’s Paycheck 
Once a ghost is entered on the payroll and his timecard has been approved, the third step in 
the scheme is the actual issuance of the paycheck. The heart of a ghost employee scheme is 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.559 
in the falsification of payroll records and timekeeping information. Once this falsification 
has occurred, the perpetrator does not generally take an active role in the issuance of the 
check. The payroll department prints the check—based on the bogus information provided 
by the perpetrator—as it would any other paycheck.  
 
Delivery of the Paycheck  
The final step in a ghost employee scheme is the distribution of the checks to the 
perpetrator. Paychecks might be hand delivered to employees while at work, mailed to 
employees at their home addresses, or — most commonly now — directly deposited into the 
employees’ bank accounts. If employees are paid in currency rather than by check, the 
distribution is almost always conducted in-person and on-site. 
 
Ideally, those in charge of payroll distribution should not have a hand in any of the other 
functions of the payroll cycle. For instance, the person who enters new employees in the 
payroll system should not be allowed to distribute paychecks because this person can include 
a ghost on the payroll, then simply pocket the fraudulent check when paychecks are being 
disbursed. Obviously, when the perpetrator of a ghost employee scheme is allowed to mail 
checks to employees or pass them out at work, he is in a perfect position to ensure that the 
ghost’s check is delivered to himself.  
 
In most instances the perpetrator does not have the authority to distribute paychecks, and so 
must make sure that the victim organization sends the checks to a place where he can 
recover them. When checks are not distributed in the workplace, they are usually mailed to 
employees or deposited directly into those employees’ accounts.  
 
If the fictitious employee was added into the payroll or personnel records by the perpetrator, 
the problem of distribution is usually minor. When the ghost’s employment information is 
entered, the perpetrator simply lists an address or bank account to which the payments can 
be sent. In the case of purely fictitious ghost employees, the address is often the 
perpetrator’s own (the same goes for bank accounts). The fact that two employees (the 
perpetrator and the ghost) are receiving payments at the same destination may indicate 
payroll fraud. Some fraudsters avoid this duplication by having payments sent to a post 
office box or a separate bank account.  
 
Remember that a ghost employee is not always a fictitious person. It may, instead, be a real 
person who is conspiring with the perpetrator to defraud the company. For example, some 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.560                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees place their relatives or spouses on the company payroll. When real persons are 
falsely included on the payroll, the checks are sent to the homes or accounts of these 
persons.  
 
Distribution is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employee who was 
simply not removed from the payroll. If paychecks are distributed through the mail or by 
direct deposit, the perpetrator will have to enter the terminated employee’s records and 
change their delivery information. In companies where paychecks are distributed by hand or 
are held at a central location for employees to collect, the perpetrator can ignore the payroll 
records and simply pick up the fraudulent paychecks.  
 
Falsified Hours and Salary   
The most common method of misappropriating funds from the payroll is the overpayment 
of wages. For hourly employees, the size of a paycheck is based on two factors: the number 
of hours worked and the rate of pay. It is therefore obvious that for an hourly employee to 
fraudulently increase the size of his paycheck, he must either falsify the number of hours he 
has worked or change his wage rate. (See “Falsified Hours and Salary” flowchart.) Since 
salaried employees do not receive compensation based on their time at work, in most cases 
these employees generate fraudulent wages by increasing their rates of pay. 
 
When discussing payroll frauds that involve overstated hours, one must first understand how 
an employee’s time at work is recorded. Time is generally kept by one of three methods. 
Time clocks may be used to mark the time when an employee begins and finishes work. The 
employee inserts a card into the clock at the beginning and end of work, and the time is 
imprinted on that card. In more sophisticated systems, computers may track the time 
employees spend on the job based on log-in codes or a similar indicator. Finally, timecards 
showing the number of hours an employee worked on a particular day are often prepared 
manually by the employee and approved by his manager.  
 
Manually Prepared Timecards 
When hours are recorded manually, an employee typically fills out his timecard to reflect the 
number of hours he has worked, then presents it to his supervisor for approval. The 
supervisor verifies the accuracy of the timecard, signs the card to indicate his approval, then 
forwards it to the payroll department so that a paycheck can be issued.  
If an employee fills out his own timecard, it is easy to falsify the number of hours worked. 
He simply writes down false information, showing that he arrived at work earlier or left later 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.561 
than he actually did. The difficulty is not in falsifying the timecard, but in getting the 
fraudulent card approved by the employee’s supervisor. There are basically three ways for 
the employee to obtain the authorization he needs. 
 
FORGING A SUPERVISOR’S SIGNATURE  
When using this method, an employee typically withholds his timecard from those being sent 
to the supervisor for approval, forges the supervisor’s signature or initials, then adds the 
timecard to the stack of authorized cards, which are sent to the payroll department. The 
fraudulent timecard arrives at the payroll department with what appears to be a supervisor’s 
approval and a paycheck is subsequently issued.  
 
COLLUSION WITH A SUPERVISOR 
The second way to obtain approval of a fraudulent timecard is to collude with a supervisor 
who authorizes timekeeping information. In these schemes, a supervisor knowingly signs 
false timecards and the employee kicks back a portion of the overpaid wages to the 
supervisor. In some cases, the supervisor may take the entire amount of the overpayment. It 
may be particularly difficult to detect payroll fraud when a supervisor colludes with an 
employee, because managers are often relied upon as a control to ensure proper 
timekeeping.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A supervisor assigned employees to better work  areas or better jobs, but in return she 
demanded payment. The payment was arranged by the falsification of the employees’ 
timecards, which the supervisor  authorized. The employees we re compensated for fictitious 
overtime, which was kicked back to the supervisor.  
 
“RUBBER STAMP” SUPERVISORS 
The third way to obtain approval of fraudulent timecards is to rely on a supervisor to 
approve them without reviewing their accuracy. The “lazy manager” method seems risky and 
one would think that it would be uncommon, but the truth is that it occurs quite frequently. 
A recurring theme in occupational fraud schemes is the reliance of perpetrators on the 
inattentiveness of others. When an employee sees an opportunity to make a little extra 
money without getting caught, that employee is more likely to be emboldened to attempt a 
fraud scheme. The fact that a supervisor is known to “rubber stamp” timecards or even 
ignore them can be a factor in an employee’s decision to begin stealing from his company.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.562                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.563 
EXAMPLE 
A temporary employee noticed that his manager did not reconcile the expense journal 
monthly. Thus, the manager did not know ho w much was being paid  to the temporary 
agency. The fraudster completed fictitious time reports, which were sent to the temporary 
agency and which caused the victim company to pay over $30,000 in fraudulent wages. 
Since the fraudster controlled the mail and the manager did not review the expense journal, 
this extremely simple scheme went undetected for some time.  
 
POOR CUSTODY PROCEDURES 
One form of control breakdown that often occurs is the failure to maintain proper control 
over timecards. In a properly run system, timecards that have been authorized by 
management should be sent directly to payroll. Those who prepare the timecards should not 
have access to them after they have been approved. If this separation of duties is not 
observed, the person who prepared a timecard can alter it after his supervisor has approved 
the timecard but before it is delivered to payroll. For instance, the employee might fill out his 
timecard in erasable ink, obtain his supervisor’s signature on the timecard, and then change 
the hours reflected on the timecard so that he will be overcompensated.  
 
Another way hours are falsified is in the misreporting of leave time. This is not as common 
as timecard falsification, but it does occur with some frequency. Incidentally, this is the one 
instance in which salaried employees commit payroll fraud by falsifying their hours. A leave 
time scheme is very simple. An employee takes a certain amount of time off of work as paid 
leave or vacation, but does not report this leave time. Employees typically receive a certain 
amount of paid leave per year. If a person takes a leave of absence but does not report it, 
those days are not deducted from his allotted days off. In other words, he gets more leave 
time than he is entitled to. The result is that the employee shows up for work less, yet still 
receives the same pay.  
 
Time Clocks and Other Automated Timekeeping Systems 
In companies that use time clocks to collect timekeeping information, payroll fraud is usually 
uncomplicated. In the typical scenario, the time clock is located in an unrestricted area, and a 
timecard for each employee is kept nearby. The employees insert their timecards into the 
time clock at the beginning and end of their shifts and the clock imprints the time. The 
length of time an employee spends at work is thus recorded. Supervisors should be present 
at the beginning and end of shifts to ensure that employees do not punch the timecards of 
absent coworkers, but this simple control is often overlooked. Without proper supervision, 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.564                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees can punch the timecards of absent coworkers so that it appears the absent 
employee was at work that day. The absent employee is therefore overcompensated on his 
next paycheck. 
 
Rates of Pay 
It should be remembered that an employee can also receive a larger paycheck by changing 
his pay rate. An employee’s personnel or payr oll records reflect his rate of pay. If an 
employee can gain access to these records, or has an accomplice with access to them, he can 
adjust them so that he receives a larger paycheck.  
 
Commission Schemes 
Commission is a form of compensation calculated as a percentage of the amount of 
transactions a salesperson or other employee generates. It is a unique form of compensation 
that is not based on hours worked or a set yearly salary, but rather on an employee’s revenue 
output. A commissioned employee’s wages are based on two factors, the amount of sales he 
generates and the percentage of those sales he is paid. In other words, there are two ways an 
employee on commission can fraudulently increase his pay: (1) falsify the amount of sales 
made, or (2) increase his rate of commission. (See “Commission Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
Fictitious Sales 
Establishing unobtainable sales quotas that employees think are arbitrary will increase the 
pressure to establish fictitious performance levels. If the pressure becomes significant, the 
employee might resort to adding fictitious sales and accounts receivable to meet the sales 
quotas. 
 
An employee can falsify the amount of sales he has made in one of two ways, the first being 
the creation of fictitious sales. The manner in which fictitious sales are created depends on 
the industry in which the perpetrator operates. Fictitious sales might be constructed by the 
creation of fraudulent sales orders, purchase orders, credit authorizations, packing slips, 
invoices, and so on. On the other hand, a culprit might simply ring up a false sale on a cash 
register. The key is that a fictitious sale is created, that it appears to be legitimate, and that 
the victim organization reacts by issuing a commission check to the perpetrator.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.565 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.566                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE  
An unscrupulous insurance agent took advant age of his company’s incentive commissions, 
which paid $1.25 for every $1.00 of premiums generated in the first year of a policy. The 
agent wrote policies to fictitious customers, paid the premiums, and received his 
commissions, which created an illicit profit on the transaction. For instance, if the fraudster 
paid $100,000 in premiums, he would receive $125,000 in commissions, a $25,000 
profit. No payments were made on the fr audulent policies after the first year.  
 
If a salesperson’s primary compensation is based on sales, without regard to collection, then 
there is an incentive to produce quantity rather than quality sales. It is natural for companies 
to push for higher sales levels to sustain growth. If the salespersons’ compensation is based 
solely on quantity and not on a combination of quantity and  quality, however, then the 
compensation incentive is misplaced. This might create an atmosphere which, if coupled 
with opportunity, will produce inflated or fictitious sales. 
 
Altered Sales  
The second way for a fraudster to overstate the amount of sales he has made is to alter the 
prices listed on sales documents. In other words, the perpetrator charges one price to a 
customer, but records a higher price in the company books. This causes the victim company 
to pay a larger commission than the perpetrator deserves. To make these schemes work, the 
employee might have to intercept and alter the invoices that are sent to the customer. (The 
invoices the company sends out will reflect a higher purchase price than the customer agreed 
to, so if the customer receives these invoices he is likely to complain about the discrepancy.) 
The employee may also overstate the revenue received from his customers.  
 
Altering Commission Rates 
As mentioned above, the other way to manipulate the commission process is to change the 
employee’s rate of commission. This would likely necessitate the alteration of payroll or 
personnel records, which should be off-limits to the sales staff.  
 
Detection of Payroll Schemes 
Independent Payroll Distribution 
Ghost employee schemes can be uncovered by having personnel (other than the payroll 
department) distribute the payroll checks or paystubs, and by requiring positive identification 
of the payee. However, as more and more companies are moving to a direct-deposit payroll 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.567 
with pay stubs available for viewing online, hand-delivering paychecks or paystubs is 
becoming an obsolete method of detecting ghost employees.  
 
Analysis of Payee Address or Accounts 
If payroll checks are either mailed or deposited automatically, then a list of duplicate 
addresses or deposit accounts may reveal ghost employees or duplicate payments. 
 
Duplicate Identification Numbers 
Because each employee is required to have a government-issued identification number (such 
as a Social Security or Social Insurance number), a listing of duplicate numbers may reveal 
ghost employees. 
 
Overtime Authorization 
Requiring employees to have overtime authorized by a supervisor, having the supervisor be 
responsible for the timecards, and having the supervisor refer the timecards directly to 
payroll will aid in reducing overtime abuses. In addition, the payroll department should scan 
the time reports and question obvious abuses such as only one employee working overtime 
in a department or excessive overtime on a timecard. By examining the source 
documentation, one may detect unauthorized overtime and falsified hours abuses. 
 
Commissions 
Commission schemes can often be detected with the following techniques: 
• Compare commission expenses to sales figures to verify linear correlation. 
• Prepare a comparative analysis of commission earned by salesperson, verifying rates and 
calculation accuracy. Inordinately high earnings by an individual could signal fraud. 
• Analyze sales by salesperson for uncollected sales amounts. 
• Determine proper segregation of duties in calculation of commission amounts. 
Commissions should be independently provided by personnel outside the sales 
department. 
• Contact a random sample of customers to confirm sales.  
 
TREND ANALYSIS ON WRITTEN-OFF ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE 
Stratify the written-off accounts receivable data and examine it for possible trends and 
patterns. For example, do any of the following trends appear? 
• Same salesperson 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.568                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Same accounting period (unless only an annual review of accounts receivable is 
performed) 
• Same collector 
• Collection rates by agency or collector 
 
Any of these trends might indicate fictitious accounts receivable, or that only new or good 
accounts are being assigned to collectors or collection agencies. 
 
Analysis of Deductions from Payroll Checks 
An analysis of the payroll withholdings may reveal either ghost employees or trust account 
abuses. Ghost employees will often have no withholding taxes, insurance, or other normal 
deductions. Therefore, a listing of any employee without these items may reveal a ghost 
employee. 
 
An analysis of withholding-tax deposits may reveal that trust account taxes have been 
“borrowed,” even for a short period, before the taxes are deposited. Comparing the 
disbursement date with the deposit date should reveal if the trust account taxes have been 
borrowed. Additionally, any delinquent payroll tax notices from the taxing authorities should 
serve as a red flag to potential trust account tax “borrowings.” 
 
Other Detection Methods 
Other methods for detecting ghost employees include:  
• Reviewing company e-mail address directories to ensure that all employees receiving 
paychecks have a company e-mail address issued by the IT Department 
• Comparing employee names, addresses, and social security numbers, as well as direct-
 deposit bank account numbers to determine if there are any unexpected duplicates 
• Comparing employee payroll records to human resources employee files to ensure social 
security numbers and names match 
• Examining payroll checks for dual endorsements 
 
Prevention of Payroll Schemes 
There are two basic preventive measures for payroll-related fraud: segregation of duties and 
periodic payroll review and analysis. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
The following duties should be segregated:  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.569 
• Payroll preparation 
• Payroll disbursement (into payroll and withholding tax accounts) 
• Payroll distribution  
• Payroll bank reconciliations 
• Human resource departmental functions 
 
If payroll is prepared by personnel not responsible for its distribution and reconciliation, it 
will be difficult for anyone to successfully add ghost employees. They will also be prevented 
from “borrowing” the trust account taxes because  they will not have access to the disbursing 
function. In smaller companies, this function is often handled outside the firm at pennies  
per employee. 
 
After the payroll checks are prepared, the transfer of funds from the general accounts to the 
payroll accounts should be handled by accounting. The personnel department should 
distribute checks and require identification in exchange for the payroll checks. This will 
curtail the opportunity to add ghost employees to the payroll. A suggested form of 
identification might be company-issued access passes, if available. 
 
If the bank reconciliation function for the payroll account is assigned to someone other than 
those in the above described functions, then all the payroll functions have been segregated. 
No one is able to add ghost employees or “borrow” the withholding taxes without the 
opportunity for discovery by someone else. 
 
Periodic Review and Analysis of Payroll 
Periodically, an independent review of the payroll might reveal that internal controls are not 
working as designed. Comparing deposit dates with dates of payroll disbursement or transfer 
may reveal ghost employees. An occasional independent payroll distribution may reveal 
ghost employees. 
 
The existence of the following may indicate the presence of ghost employees: 
• More than one employee with the same address. 
• More than one employee with the same government identification number. 
• More than one employee with the same account number (automatic deposit). 
• Employees with no withholding. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.570                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Indicators of Payroll Fraud 
In addition, the following audit program will help spot red flags to payroll distribution fraud 
and help with installing control procedures: 
• Are personnel records maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions? 
• Is the payroll accounting function independent of the general ledger function? 
• Are changes to payroll not made unless the personnel department sends approved 
notification directly to the payroll department? 
• Are references and backgrounds checked for new hires? 
• Are all wage rates authorized in writing by a designated official? 
• Are signed authorizations on file for employees whose wages are subject to special 
deductions? 
• Are bonuses, commissions, and overtime approved in advance and reviewed for 
compliance with company policies? 
• Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays reviewed for compliance with company policy? 
• Are appropriate forms completed and signed by employees to show authorization for 
payroll deductions and withholding exemptions? 
• Is the payroll periodically checked against the personnel records for terminated 
employees, fictitious employees, etc.? 
• Is a time clock used for office employees as well as factory workers? 
• If a time clock is used, are timecards (1) punched by employees in the presence of a 
designated supervisor and (2) signed by a supervisor at the end of the payroll period? 
• Are timecards and production reports reviewed and compared with payroll distribution 
reports and production schedules? 
• Are payroll registers reviewed and approved before disbursements are made for (1) 
names of employees, (2) hours worked, (3) wage rates, (4) deductions, (5) agreement with 
payroll checks, and (6) unusual items? 
• Are all employees paid by check out of a separate bank payroll account? 
• Are payroll checks prenumbered and issued in numerical sequence? 
• Is access restricted to unissued payroll checks and signature plates? 
• Are checks drawn and signed by designated officials who do not (1) prepare payroll, (2) 
have access to the accounting records, or (3) have custody of cash funds? 
• Are payroll checks distributed by someone other than the department head or the person 
who prepares the payroll? 
• Is the distribution of the payroll rotated periodically to different employees without 
 prior notice? 
• Is the payroll bank account reconciled by a designated employee who (1) is not involved 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.571 
in the preparing of payroll, (2) does not sign the checks, or (3) does not handle the check 
distributions? 
• Do payroll bank account reconciliation procedures include comparing the paid checks to 
the payroll, and scrutinizing canceled check endorsements? 
• Are the payroll registers reconciled to the general ledger control accounts? 
• Is a liability account set up for all wages that have remained unclaimed for a certain 
period of time? If yes, (1) have these wages been redeposited in a special bank account, 
and (2) is identification required to be presented at the time of their subsequent 
distribution?  
• Are distributions of hours (direct and indirect) to activity or departments reviewed and 
approved by supervisory personnel?  
• Are actual payroll amounts reviewed and compared to budgeted amounts, and are 
variances analyzed regularly?  
• Do adequate procedures exist for timely and accurate preparation and filing of payroll 
tax returns and related taxes?  
• Are employee benefit plan contributions reconciled to appropriate employee  
census data?  
• Are adequate, detailed records maintained of the entity’s liability for vacation pay and 
sick pay? Are they reconciled to the general ledger control accounts periodically?  
 
 
Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Employees can manipulate an organization’s expense reimbursement procedures to generate 
fraudulent disbursements. Expense reimbursements are usually paid by the company in the 
following manner. An employee submits a report detailing an expense incurred for a 
business purpose, such as a business lunch with a client, airfare, hotel bills associated with 
business travel, and so forth. In preparing an expense report, an employee is usually required 
to explain the business purpose for the expense, as well as the time, date, and location in 
which it was incurred. Support documentation for the expense, typically a receipt, should be 
attached to the report. In some cases canceled checks written by the employee or copies of a 
personal credit card statement showing the expense are allowed in lieu of receipts. The 
report must usually be authorized by a supervisor in order for the expense to be reimbursed. 
The four most common types of expense reimbursement schemes are mischaracterized 
expenses, overstated expenses, fictitious expenses, and multiple reimbursements.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.572                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Mischaracterized Expense Reimbursements 
Most companies only reimburse certain expenses of their employees. Which expenses a 
company will pay for depends to an extent upon policy, but in general, business-related 
travel, lodging, and meals are reimbursed. One of the most basic expense reimbursement 
schemes is perpetrated by simply requesting reimbursement for a personal expense by 
claiming that the expense is business-related. (See “Mischaracterized Expenses” flowchart.) 
Examples of mischaracterized expenses include claiming personal travel as a business trip, 
listing dinner with a friend as “business development,” and so on. Employees submit the 
receipts from their personal expenses along with their expense reports, but concoct business 
reasons for the incurred costs. The false expense report induces the victim organization to 
issue a check, reimbursing the perpetrator for his personal expenses.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.573 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.574                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In cases involving airfare and overnight travel, a mischaracterization can sometimes be 
detected by simply comparing the employee’s expense reports to his work schedule. Often, 
the dates of the so-called “business trip” coincide with a vacation or day off. Detailed 
expense reports allow a company to make this kind of comparison and are therefore very  
helpful in preventing expenses schemes.  
 
A common element to mischaracterized expense schemes is the failure to submit detailed 
expense reports, or any expense reports at all. Some companies allow employees to simply 
turn in receipts, without explaining the business purpose of the expenses reflected in the 
receipts. This makes it exceedingly easy for an employee to turn in, for example, a receipt 
from a restaurant and receive a check to reimburse him for a “business dinner.” Other 
companies provide employees with company credit cards and/or procurement cards and 
allow employees to spend company funds without providing detailed information justifying 
the purchase and sometimes not even requiring receipts. Requiring detailed information 
means more than just supporting documents; it should mean precise statements of what was 
purchased, as well as when, where, and for whom the purchase was made. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A fraudster submitted credit ca rd statements as support for expenses, but he only submitted 
the top portion of the statements, not the port ion that describes what  was purchased. Over 
95 percent of his expenses that were reimbur sed were of a personal rather than a business 
nature.  
 
Even when detailed expense reports are required, it may be difficult to detect a 
mischaracterized expense reimbursement scheme. For example, suppose a traveling salesman 
goes on a trip and runs up a large bar bill one night in his hotel, saves his receipt, and lists 
this expense as “business entertainment” on an expense report. Nothing about the time, 
date, or nature of the expense would readily point to fraud, and the receipt would appear to 
substantiate the expense. Short of contacting the client who was allegedly entertained, there 
may be little a victim organization can do to identify the expense as fraudulent.  
 
Overstated Expense Reimbursements 
Instead of seeking reimbursement for personal expenses, some employees overstate the cost 
of actual business expenses. (See “Overstated Expenses” flowchart.) This can be 
accomplished in a number of ways.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.575 
 
 
                Overstated Expenses 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.576                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Altered Receipts 
The most fundamental example of an overstated expense reimbursement scheme occurs 
when an employee doctors a receipt or other supporting documentation to reflect a higher 
cost than what he actually paid. The employee may use white-out, a ballpoint pen, or some 
other method to change the price reflected on the receipt before submitting his expense 
report. If the company does not require original documents as support, the perpetrator 
generally attaches a copy of the receipt to his expense report. Alterations are usually less 
noticeable on a photocopy than on an original document. For precisely this reason, 
businesses should require original receipts and ink signatures on expense reports. 
 
As with other expense frauds, overstated expense reimbursement schemes often succeed 
because of poor controls. In companies where supporting documents are not required, for 
example, fraudsters simply lie about how much they paid for a business expense. With no 
support available, it may be very difficult to disprove an employee’s false expense claims. 
 
Overpurchasing  
Another way to overstate a reimbursement form is the “overpurchasing” of business 
expenses. This method is typically used by employees seeking reimbursement for travel 
expenses. Assume an employee is scheduled to make a business trip to another city. The 
employee purchases an airline ticket far in advance of the trip when rates are low. When it is 
close to the day of the trip, the employee purchases another ticket to the same destination. 
This ticket will be more expensive than the first one. To further jack up the price, the second 
ticket might include several stops and layovers on a very circuitous route. The employee 
removes the passenger receipt coupon from the second ticket then returns it for a full 
refund. He actually flies on the first (less expensive) ticket he purchased, but attaches the 
receipt from the more expensive ticket to his expense report. 
 
Overstating Another Employee’s Expenses 
Overstated expense reimbursement schemes are not only committed by the person who 
actually incurs the expense. Sometimes, they may be committed by a coworker who handles 
or processes expense reports.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A petty cashier whited out other employees’ requests for travel advances and inserted larger 
amounts. The cashier then passed on the legitimate travel advances and pocketed the excess. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.577 
This kind of scheme is most likely to occur in a system where expenses are reimbursed in 
currency rather than by a check, since the perpetrator would be unable to extract his “cut” 
from a single check made out to another employee.  
 
Orders to Overstate Expenses  
Finally, some employees knowingly falsify their own reports, but do so at the direction of 
their supervisors. The employees may be threatened with loss of their jobs if they do not go 
along with the scheme. Sometimes the supervisor splits the proceeds of the fraud with his 
subordinates. In other cases, the excess money goes into a slush fund or is used for some 
other business purpose that is not in the company budget. The supervisors who engage in 
these schemes often believe they are really acting in the best interests of their companies.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A sales executive instructed his salesmen to inflate their expenses in order to generate cash 
for a slush fund. This fund was used to pay bribes and to provide improper forms of 
entertainment for clients and customers.  
 
Fictitious Expense Reimbursements  
Employees sometimes seek reimbursement for wholly fictitious expenses. Instead of 
overstating a real business expense or seeking reimbursement for a personal expense, an 
employee just invents an expense and requests that it be reimbursed. (See “Fictitious 
Expenses” flowchart.) 
 
Producing Fictitious Receipts  
One way to generate a reimbursement for a fictitious expense is to create bogus support 
documents, such as false receipts. The emergence of personal computers has enabled some 
employees to create realistic-looking counterfeit receipts at home. These counterfeits are 
often very sophisticated, even including the logos of the stores where goods or services were 
allegedly purchased. Computers are not the only means of creating support for a fictitious 
expense. Some employees use calculator tapes, others cut and paste old receipts from 
suppliers, and some even use professional printers to generate fictitious receipts.  
 
Unfortunately, not all companies require receipts to be attached to expense reports. Checks 
written by the employee or copies of his personal credit card bill might be allowed as 
support in lieu of a receipt. Some employees write personal checks that appear to be for 
business expenses, then photocopy these checks and attach them to reimbursement requests. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.578                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In actuality, nothing is purchased with the checks; they are destroyed after the copies are 
made. The perpetrator ends up receiving a reimbursement from his employer without ever 
actually incurring a business expense. The same method can be used with credit cards, where 
a copy of a statement is used to support a purchase. Once the expense report is filed, the 
perpetrator returns the item and receives a credit to his account. 
 
Obtaining Blank Receipts from Vendors 
If the perpetrator does not create receipts, they can be obtained from legitimate suppliers in 
a number of ways. Some employees request blank receipts from waiters, bartenders, taxi cab 
drivers, etc. These persons fill in the blank receipts to “create” business expenses. A 
fraudster might also have a friend, spouse, relative, etc. who can provide receipts for 
“business expenses” that never really occur.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee’s girlfriend worked at a restaurant near the victim organization. This 
girlfriend validated credit card receipts and gave them to the fraudster so that he could 
submit them with his expense reports.  
 
In some cases a fraudster will steal an entire stack of blank receipts from a hotel, restaurant, 
etc., then fill them in and, over time, use them to verify fictitious business expenses.  
 
Claiming the Expenses of Others 
Another way perpetrators use actual receipts to generate unwarranted reimbursements is by 
submitting expense reports for expenses that were paid by others. For instance, an employee 
might save the receipt from a meal that was paid for by another party, then request 
reimbursement for the meal himself.  
 
Multiple Reimbursements 
The least common of the expense reimbursement schemes involves multiple 
reimbursements. This type of fraud involves the submission of a single expense more than 
one time. The most frequent example of a multiple reimbursement scheme is the submission 
of several types of support for the same expense.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.580                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An employee would use, for example, an airline ticket stub  and a travel agency invoice on 
separate expense reports so that he could be reimbursed twice for the cost of a single flight. 
The fraudster would have his division president authorize one report and have the vice 
president approve the other so that neither would see both reports. Additionally, the 
perpetrator allowed a time lag of about a month between the filing of the two reports so that 
the duplication would be less noticeable. 
 
In cases where a company does not require original documents as support, some employees 
even use several copies of the same support document to generate multiple reimbursements. 
Rather than file two expense reports, employees may also charge an item to the company 
credit card, save the receipt, and attach it to an expense report as if they paid for the item 
themselves. The victim organization therefore ends up paying twice for the same expense.  
 
Detection of Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Detecting expense reimbursement fraud involves two basic methods. The first of these is a 
review and analysis of expense accounts. The second detection method is a detailed review 
of expense reports. 
 
Review and Analysis of Expense Accounts 
Generally, expense account review uses one of two methods: historical comparisons or 
comparisons with budgeted amounts. A historical comparison compares the balance 
expended this period in relation to the balance spent in prior, similar periods. When 
performing this review, consider changes to the marketing, servicing, or other company 
operations. 
 
Budgets are estimates of the money and/or time necessary to complete the task. They are 
based on past experience with consideration for current and future business conditions. 
Therefore, when comparing actual and budgeted expenses, determining inordinate expenses 
or inaccurate budget estimates is important. 
 
Detailed Review of Expense Reports 
Overall, the best detection method is a detailed review of employee expense reports. This 
method requires that the fraud examiner have, at the time of the examination, a calendar and 
a copy of the employee’s schedule for the relevant period. The examiner should be familiar 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.581 
with the travel and entertainment policies of the company. Additionally, the following two 
steps may help to detect and deter employee expense abuses: 
• Require employees to submit their expense reports for a detailed review before payment 
is reimbursed. If an employee knows that his expense report will be thoroughly 
reviewed, he will be less likely to include fraudulent expenses on the report.  
• Periodically audit travel and entertainment accounts. This is particularly effective shortly 
before employee performance reviews. 
 
Prevention of Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Detailed Expense Reports: Submission and Review 
Detailed expense reports should require the following information: 
• Receipts or other support documentation 
• Explanation of the expense including specific business purpose 
• Time period expense occurred  
• Place of expenditure  
• Amount   
 
It is not enough to have the detailed reports submitted if they are not reviewed. A policy 
requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the appropriate 
detail, will help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for reimbursement. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.601 



:


asset misappropri fraudul disburs
in fraudul disburs scheme an employe make a distribut of compani fund
for a dishonest purpos exampl of fraudul disburs includ forg compani
check the submiss of fals invoic doctor timecard and so forth on their face
the fraudul disburs do not appear ani differ from valid disburs of cash
for instanc when an employe run a bogu invoic through the account payabl system
the victim organ cut a check for the bad invoic right along with all the legitim
payment it make the perpetr ha taken monei from hi employ in such a wai that it
appear to be a normal disburs of cash someon might notic the fraud base on the
amount recipi or destin of the payment but the method of payment is legitim
regist disburs scheme
fraudul disburs at the cash regist ar differ from the other scheme that
often take place at the regist such as skim and cash larceni when cash is stolen as
part of a regist disburs scheme the remov of the cash is record on the regist
tape a fals transact is enter so it appear that the disburs of monei wa
legitim
there ar two basic regist disburs scheme fals refund and fals void while the
scheme ar larg similar there ar a few differ between the two that merit discuss
them separ
fals refund
a refund is process at the regist when a custom return an item of merchandis that
wa purchas from the store the transact that is enter on the regist indic the
merchandis is be replac in the store inventori and the purchas price is be
return to the custom in other word a refund show cash be disburs from the
regist to the custom see fals refund flowchart
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1502 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1503
fictiti refund
in a fictiti refund scheme an employe process a transact as if a custom were
return merchandis even though there is no actual return two thing result from thi
fraudul transact the first is that the employe take cash from the regist in the
amount of the fals return for instanc if the employe process a fictiti return for a
100 pair of shoe he remov 100 from the regist the regist tape will indic that the
shoe were return so the disburs appear to be legitim the regist tape balanc
with the amount of cash on hand becaus the fraudul refund account for the cash that
the employe stole
the second thing that happen in a fictiti refund scheme is that a debit is made to the
inventori system show that the merchandis ha been return to the inventori sinc
the transact is fictiti no merchandis is actual return the result is that the
compani inventori is overst
exampl
a manag creat 5500 worth of fals re turn result in a larg shortag in the
compani inventori he wa abl to carri hi scheme on for sever month howev
becaus 1 inventori wa not count regularli and 2 the perpetr a manag wa
on of the peopl who perform inventori count
overst refund
rather than creat an entir fictiti refund some employe mere overst the amount
of a legitim refund and steal the excess monei for exampl if a custom return 100
worth of merchandis the employe might ring up a 200 return the employe give the
custom 100 in return for the merchandis then pocket the remain 100 thi will
result in shrinkag of 100 worth of inventori
credit card refund
when purchas ar made with a credit card rather than cash refund appear as credit to
the custom credit card rather than as cash disburs some dishonest employe
process fals refund on credit card sale in lieu of process a normal cash transact
on benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetr doe not have to physic take
cash from the regist and carri it out of the store by process the refund to a credit card
account a perpetr reap a financi gain and avoid the potenti embarrass of be
caught redhand take cash
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1504 2011 fraud examin manual
in a typic credit card refund scheme the perpetr ring up a refund on a credit card sale
even though the merchandis is not actual be return the employe credit hi own
credit card number rather than the custom the result is that the cost of the item is
credit to the perpetr credit card account
a more creativ and widerang applic of the credit card refund scheme occur when
employe process refund to the account of other peopl and in return receiv a portion
of the refund as a kickback suppos a person is 100 short on the rent that person goe to
the retail store where hi friend is a teller and ha the teller process a credit of 150 to hi
account the custom then goe to an atm machin and withdraw 150 in cash he
pai 50 to the teller and keep 100 for himself
refund scheme ar more difficult to perpetr in mani hightech retail store where the
cash regist have antifraud control that requir the refund to be made to the origin
credit card us for the purchas or that onli allow for refund in the form of a store credit
for the current valu of the item purchas
fals void
fictiti void ar similar to refund scheme in that thei make fraudul disburs
from the regist appear to be legitim when a sale is void on a regist a copi of the
custom receipt is usual attach to a void slip along with the signatur or initi of a
manag indic that the transact ha been approv see fals void flowchart in
order to process a fals void then the first thing the perpetr need is the custom
copi of the sale receipt typic when an employe set about process a fictiti void
he simpli withhold the custom receipt at the time of the sale in mani case custom
do not notic that thei ar not given a receipt
with the custom copi of the receipt in hand the culprit ring a void sale whatev
monei the custom paid for the item is remov from the regist as though it is be
return to a custom the copi of the custom receipt is attach to the void slip to
verifi the authent of the transact
befor the void sale will be perceiv as valid a manag gener must approv the
transact in mani instanc the manag in question simpli neglect to verifi the
authent of the void sale a number of manag will sign most anyth present to
them and thu leav themselv vulner to void sale scheme it is not a coincid
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1505
that the perpetr of these crime present their void slip to manag who ar
lackadais about author them these kind of manag ar gener target by the
fraudster and ar essenti to the success of the scheme
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1506 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1507
exampl
an employe process fraudul void kept custom receipt and present them to her
supervisor for review at the end of her shift long after the alleg transact had taken
place her supervisor approv the void sale and the account receiv depart
fail to notic the excess number of void sale process by thi employe
obvious not all manag give rubberstamp approv to void sale some employe
must therefor take other rout to get their void sale approv in most of these case
the perpetr simpli forg hi supervisor author on the fraudul void slip it is
also possibl that manag will conspir with regist employe and approv fals void in
return for a share of the proce from the scheme
conceal regist disburs scheme
as ha alreadi been discuss two thing happen when a fals refund or void is enter into
the regist the first is that the employe commit the fraud remov cash from the
regist and the second is that the item allegedli be return is debit back into the
perpetu inventori of cours there realli is no merchandis be return thi lead to
inventori shrinkag a situat in which there is less inventori actual on hand than the
perpetu inventori record reflect a certain amount of shrinkag is expect in ani retail
industri but too much of it rais concern of fraud it is therefor in the perpetr best
interest to conceal the appear of shrinkag on the book
inventori is essenti account for by a twostep process the first part of the process is
the perpetu inventori which is a run tabul of how much inventori should be on
hand when a sale of merchandis is made the perpetu inventori is credit to remov thi
merchandis from the record the amount of merchandis that should be on hand is
reduc convers when merchandis is return the perpetu inventori is debit
period someon from the compani take a physic count of the inventori go
through the stockroom or warehous and count the amount of inventori that is actual on
hand the two figur ar then compar to see if there is a discrep between the
perpetu inventori what should be on hand and the physic inventori what is on hand
in regist disburs scheme shrinkag is often conceal by overst inventori
dure the physic count especi if take inventori is on of the perpetr duti
the perpetr simpli overst the amount of inventori on hand so it match the
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1508 2011 fraud examin manual
perpetu inventori for a more detail analysi of method us to conceal inventori
shrinkag pleas see the inventori and other asset section
small disburs
anoth wai for employe to avoid detect in a refund scheme is to keep the size of the
disburs low mani compani set limit below which manag review of a refund
is not requir where thi is the case employe simpli process copiou number of
refund that ar small enough that thei do not have to be review
exampl
an employe creat over 1000 fals refund all under the review limit of 15 he wa
eventu caught becaus he began process refund befor store hour and anoth
employe notic that refund were appear on the system befor the store open
nevertheless befor hi scheme wa detect the man made off with over 11000 of hi
employ monei
destroi record
on final mean of conceal a regist scheme as with mani kind of fraud is to destroi
all record of the transact most conceal method ar concern with keep
manag from realiz that fraud ha occur when an employe resort to destroi
record howev he typic ha conced that manag will discov hi theft the
purpos of destroi record is usual to prevent manag from determin who the
thief is
detect of regist disburs scheme
fictiti refund or void sale
fictiti refund or void sale can often be detect when close examin the
document submit with the cash receipt
on detect method is to evalu the refund or discount given by each cashier or
salesperson thi analysi mai point out that a singl employe or group of employe
ha a higher incid of refund or discount than other further examin is then
necessari to determin if the refund ar appropri and properli document
sign in the regist area ask custom to ask for and examin their receipt emploi
the custom as part of the intern control system thi help ensur that the cashier or
salesperson is properli account for the sale and prevent employe from us
custom receipt as support for fals void or refund
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1509
random servic call to custom who have return merchandis or void sale can
be us to verifi the legitimaci of transact
review and analysi of decreas in gross sale andor increas in return and allow
analyz the relationship between sale cost of sale and the return and allow can
detect inappropri refund and discount if a larg cash fraud is suspect a thorough
review of these account might enlighten the examin as to the magnitud of the suspect
fraud an analysi of refund and return and allow with the actual flow of inventori
might reveal some fraud scheme the refund should caus an entri to inventori even if it is
damag inventori likewis a return will caus a correspond entri to an inventori
account there should be a linear relationship between sale and return and allow over
a relev rang ani chang in thi relationship might point to a fraud scheme unless there
is anoth valid explan such as a chang in the manufactur process chang in
product line or chang in price
regist scheme red flag
inappropri employe segreg of duti for exampl regist count and
reconcil should not be done by the cashier
cashier rather than supervisor have access to the control kei that ar necessari for
refund and void
regist employe ha author to void own transact
regist refund ar not method review
multipl cashier oper from a singl cash drawer without separ access code
person check from cashier found in regist
void transact ar not properli document or not approv by a supervisor
void cash receipt form manual system or support document for void
transact cash regist system ar not retain on file
miss or obvious alter regist tape
gap in the sequenc of transact on regist tape
an inordin number of refund void or nosal on regist tape
inventori total appear forc
multipl refund or void for am ount just under the review limit
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1510 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent of regist disburs scheme
review the segreg of duti of kei employe who staff the regist as well as the
duti of their supervisor
as cash is receiv it is import to ensur that the employe respons for
complet these import task ar inform of their respons and properli
supervis
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have paid monei on an account
and have not receiv credit or in some case who have been credit for an amount
that doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and inquiri ar also
receiv frequent from bank
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
quantiti of refund should be analyz to detect multipl small refund
commun and adher to compani polici of perform unannounc cash count
maintain the presenc of a manag or supervisor near the area of the cash regist as a
deterr to theft
review support document for void and refund transact for proprieti ie
legitimaci and approv
review the numer sequenc and complet of cash regist tape
check tamper
check tamper is uniqu among the fraudul disburs scheme becaus it is the on
group in which the perpetr physic prepar the fraudul check in most fraudul
disburs scheme the culprit gener a payment to himself by submit some fals
document to the victim organ such as an invoic or a timecard the fals document
repres a claim for payment and caus the victim organ to issu a check that the
perpetr can convert
check tamper scheme ar fundament differ in these scheme the perpetr
take physic control of a check and make it payabl to himself through on of sever
method check tamper fraud depend upon factor such as access to the compani
checkbook access to bank statement and the abil to forg signatur or alter other
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1511
inform on the face of the check most check tamper crime fall into on of four
categori forg maker scheme forg endors scheme alter paye scheme and
author maker scheme
forg maker scheme
the legal definit of forgeri includ not onli the sign of anoth person name to a
document such as a check with a fraudul intent but also the fraudul alter of a
genuin instrument thi definit is so broad that it would encompass all check tamper
scheme for the purpos of thi text the definit of forgeri ha been narrow to fit the
fraud examin need in order to properli distinguish the variou method us by
individu to tamper with check the concept of forgeri will be limit to those case in
which an individu sign anoth person name on a check
the person who sign a check is known as the maker of the check a forg maker
scheme then mai be defin as a check tamper scheme in which an employe
misappropri a check and fraudul affix the signatur of an author maker
thereon see forg maker scheme flowchart fraud that involv other type of check
tamper such as the alter of the paye or the chang of the dollar amount ar
classifi separ
in order to forg a check an employe must have access to a blank check he must be abl
to produc a convinc forgeri of an author signatur and he must be abl to conceal
hi crime conceal is a univers problem in check tamper scheme the method
us ar basic the same whether on is deal with a forg maker scheme an
intercept check scheme a conceal check scheme or an author maker scheme
therefor conceal issu will be discuss as a group later in thi section
obtain the check
employe with access to compani check
on cannot forg a compani check unless on first possess a compani check most
forgeri scheme ar commit by account payabl clerk offic manag bookkeep or
other employe whose duti typic includ the prepar of compani check these
ar peopl who have access to the compani checkbook on a regular basi and ar therefor
in the best posit to steal blank check
1 henri campbel black black law dictionari fifth edit st paul west publish co 1979 p 585
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1512 2011 fraud examin manual
employe lack access to compani check
if the perpetr doe not have access to the compani checkbook through hi work duti
he will have to find other mean of misappropri a check the wai a person steal a
check depend larg on how the checkbook is handl within a particular compani in
some circumst the checkbook is poorli guard left in unattend area where anyon
can get to it in other compani where blank check ar kept in a restrict area the
perpetr might have surreptiti obtain a kei or combin to thi area an
accomplic might provid blank check for the perpetr in return for a portion of the
stolen fund perhap a secretari see the checkbook left on a manag desk or a custodian
come across blank check in an unlock desk drawer
in some compani check ar comput gener when thi is the case an employe who
know the password for prepar and issu check can usual obtain as mani unsign
check as he desir there ar an unlimit number of wai to steal a check each
depend on the wai in which a particular compani guard it blank check in some
instanc employe go so far as to produc counterfeit check
exampl
an employe had an accomplic who work for a checkprint compani the accomplic
wa abl to print blank check with the account number of the perpetr compani the
perpetr then wrote over 100000 worth of forgeri on these counterfeit check
to whom is the check made payabl
to the perpetr
onc a blank check ha been obtain the perpetr must decid to whom it should be
made payabl in most instanc forg check ar made payabl to the perpetr himself
so that thei can be easili convert cancel check that ar payabl to an employe should
be close scrutin for the possibl of fraud
if the perpetr own hi own busi or ha establish a shell compani he will usual
write fraudul check to these entiti rather than himself these check ar not as
obvious fraudul on their face as check made payabl to an employe at the same
time these check ar easi to convert becaus the perpetr own the entiti to which the
check ar payabl
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1513
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1514 2011 fraud examin manual
to an accomplic
if a fraudster is work with an accomplic he can make the forg check payabl to that
person the accomplic then cash the check and split the monei with the employeefraudst
becaus the check is payabl to the accomplic in hi true ident it is easili
convert an addit benefit to us an accomplic is that a cancel check payabl to a
thirdparti accomplic is not as like to rais suspicion as a cancel check to an employe
the obviou drawback to us an accomplic in a scheme is that the employeefraudst
usual ha to share the proce of the scheme
to cash
the perpetr mai also write check payabl to cash in order to avoid list himself as
the paye check made payabl to cash howev must still be endors the perpetr
will have to sign hi own name or forg the name of anoth in order to convert the check
check payabl to cash ar usual view more skeptic than check payabl to person
or busi some institut mai refus to cash check made payabl to cash
to vendor
not all fraudster forg compani check to obtain cash some employe us forg maker
scheme to purchas good or servic for their own benefit these fraudul check ar
made payabl to thirdparti vendor who ar uninvolv in the fraud for instanc an
employe might forg a compani check to bui a comput for hi home the comput
vendor is not involv in the fraud at all furthermor if the victim organ regularli
doe busi with thi vendor the person who reconcil the compani account mai
assum that the check wa us for a legitim busi expens
forg the signatur
after the employe ha obtain and prepar a blank check he must forg an author
signatur in order to convert the check the most obviou method and the on that come
to mind when on think of the word forgeri is to simpli take pen in hand and sign the
name of an author maker
freehand forgeri
the difficulti a fraudster encount when physic sign the author maker name is
in creat a reason approxim of the true signatur if the forgeri appear authent
the perpetr will probabl have no problem cash the check in truth the forg
signatur mai not have to be particularli accur mani fraudster cash forg check at
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1515
liquor store groceri store or other institut that ar known to be less than dilig in
verifi signatur and identif nevertheless a poorli forg signatur is a clear red
flag of fraud the maker signatur on can cele check should be review for forgeri
dure the reconcili process
photocopi forgeri
to guarante an accur forgeri some employe make photocopi of legitim
signatur the signatur of an author signer is copi from some document such as a
busi letter onto a transpar then the transpar is laid over a blank check so that
the signatur copi onto the maker line of the check the result is a check with a perfect
signatur of an author maker
automat checksign instrument
compani that issu a larg number of check sometim util automat checksign
instrument autom signatur ar either produc with manual instrument like
signatur stamp or thei ar print by comput obvious an employe who ha access to
an automat checksign instrument will have no troubl forg the signatur of
author maker even the most rudimentari control procedur should sever limit
access to these instrument
exampl
a fiscal offic maintain a set of manual check that were unknown to other person in
the compani the compani us an autom check signer and the custodian of the signer
let the offic have uncontrol access to it us the manual check and the compani
check signer the fiscal offic wa abl to write over 90000 worth of fraudul check to
himself over a period of approxim four year
the same principl appli to computergener signatur access to the password or
program that print sign check should be restrict specif exclud those who
prepar check and those who reconcil the bank statement
convert the check
in order to convert the forg check the perpetr must endors it the endors is
typic made in the name of the paye on the check sinc identif is typic
requir when on seek to convert a check the perpetr usual need fake identif
if he forg check to real or fictiti third person as discuss earlier check payabl to
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1516 2011 fraud examin manual
cash requir the endors of the person convert them without a fake id the
perpetr will like have to endors these check in hi own name an employe
endors on a cancel check is obvious a red flag
forg endors scheme
forg endors ar those check tamper scheme in which an employe intercept a
compani check intend to pai a third parti and convert the check by endors it in the
thirdparti name in some case the employe also sign hi own name as a second
endors see forg endors scheme flowchart
a fraudster main dilemma in a forg endors scheme and in all intercept check
scheme for that matter is gain access to a check after it ha been sign the fraudster
must either steal the check between the point where it is sign and the point where it is
deliv or he must rerout the check caus it to be deliv to a locat where he can
retriev it the manner us to steal a check depend larg upon the wai the compani
handl outgo disburs anyon who is allow to handl sign check mai be in
a good posit to intercept them
intercept check befor deliveri
employe involv in deliveri of check
obvious the employe in the best posit to intercept sign check ar those whose
duti includ the handl and deliveri of sign check the most obviou exampl is a
mailroom employe who open outgo mail contain sign check and steal the
check other personnel with access to outgo check might includ account payabl
employe payrol clerk and secretari
poor control of sign check
unfortun employe ar often abl to intercept sign check becaus of poor intern
control for instanc mani employe simpli find sign check left unattend in the
work area of the person who sign them or the person charg with their deliveri in
these case it is easi for the perpetr to steal the check anoth common breakdown
occur when the person who prepar a check is also involv in the deliveri of that check
onc it ha been sign
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1517
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1518 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a highlevel manag with author to disburs employe benefit instruct account
payabl personnel to return sign benefit check to him instead of immedi deliv
them to their intend recipi these instruct were not question due to the
manag level of author within the compani the perpetr simpli took the check
that were return to him and deposit them into hi person bank account forg the
endors of the intend paye
in addit to the preced exampl secretari or clerk who prepar check for their
boss to sign ar often respons for mail those check it is veri simpl for those
employe to make out a fraudul check and obtain a signatur know that the boss will
give the sign check right back to them thi scheme is indic of the kei problem with
occup fraud trust in order for an offic to run effici highlevel employe must
be abl to reli on their subordin yet thi relianc is precis what put subordin in a
posit to defraud their employ
theft of return check
check that have been mail and ar later return to the victim for some reason such as
an incorrect address ar often target for theft by fraudster employe with access to
incom mail ar abl to intercept these return check and convert them by forg the
endors of the intend paye
exampl
a manag took and convert approxim 130000 worth of check that were
return due to noncurr address he also stole outgo check cash them and then
declar them lost the fraudster wa well known at hi bank and wa abl to convert the
check by claim that he wa do it as a favor to the real paye who were too busi to
come to the bank the fraudster wa abl to continu with hi scheme becaus the natur
of hi compani busi wa such that the recipi of the misdeliv check were often
not awar that the victim compani ow them monei therefor thei did not complain
when their check fail to arriv in addit the perpetr had complet control over the
bank reconcili so he could issu new check to those paye who did complain then
forc the reconcili make it appear that the bank balanc and book balanc
match when in fact thei did not
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1519
rerout the deliveri of check
employe mai also misappropri sign check by alter the address to which those
check ar mail these perpetr usual replac the legitim address of the paye with
an address where the employe can retriev the check such as the employe home or a
po box the employe control in other instanc the perpetr might purpos
misaddress a check so that it will be return as undeliver the employe steal the check
after it is return to the victim organ
obvious proper separ of duti should preclud anyon who prepar disburs
from be involv in their deliveri nevertheless the person who prepar a check is often
allow to address and mail it as well in some instanc where proper control ar in place
employe ar still abl to caus the misdeliveri of check
exampl
a clerk in the custom servic depart of a mortgag compani wa in charg of
chang the mail address of properti ow ner she wa assign a password that gave
her access to make these chang the clerk wa transfer to a new depart where on
of her duti wa the issuanc of check to properti owner unfortun her supervisor
forgot to cancel her old password when the clerk realiz thi oversight she would request
a check for a certain properti owner then sign onto the system with her old password and
chang the address of that properti owner the check would be sent to her the next dai
the employe would us her old password to reenter the system and replac the proper
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent thi fraudster
scheme result in a loss of over 250000 to the victim compani
convert the stolen check
onc a check ha been intercept the perpetr can cash it by forg the paye
signatur henc the term forg endors scheme depend on where he tri to cash the
check the perpetr mai or mai not need fake identif at thi stage if a perpetr
is requir to produc identif in order to cash hi stolen check and if he doe not
have a fake id in the paye name he mai us a dual endors to cash or deposit the
check in other word the perpetr forg the paye signatur as though the paye had
transfer the check to him then the perpetr endors the check in hi own name and
convert it when the bank statement is reconcil dual endors on check should
alwai rais suspicion particularli when the second signer is an employe of the compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1520 2011 fraud examin manual
alter paye scheme
the second type of intercept check scheme is the alter paye scheme thi is a form of
check tamper in which an employe intercept a compani check intend for a third
parti and alter the paye design so that the check can be convert by the employe or
an accomplic see alter paye scheme flowchart the employe insert hi own
name the name of an accomplic or the name of a fictiti entiti on the paye line of the
check the alter essenti make the check payabl to the employe or an
accomplic so there is no need to forg an endors and no need to obtain fals
identif
alter check prepar by other insert a new paye
the method us to alter the paye design on a check depend larg on how that
check is prepar and intercept incident the amount of the check mai also be alter
at the same time and by the same method as the paye design check prepar by
other can be intercept by ani of the method discuss in the forg endors
section abov when the perpetr intercept a check that ha been prepar by someon
els there ar basic two method that mai be emploi to chang the paye the first is
to insert the fals paye name in place of the true paye the true name might be
scratch out with a pen or cover up with whiteout anoth name is then enter on the
paye design line these kind of alter ar usual simpl to detect
a more sophist method occur when the perpetr of the fraud enter the account
payabl system and chang the name of paye befor check ar gener thi can be
accomplish by anyon with a password that permit access to the account payabl
address file
exampl
an account payabl employe wa so trust that her manag allow her to us hi
comput password in hi absenc the password permit access to the account payabl
address file thi employe wait until the manag wa absent then select a legitim
vendor with whom her compani did a lot of busi she held up the vendor invoic for
the dai and after work us the manag login code to chang the vendor name and
address to that of a fictiti compani the new name and address were run through the
account payabl cycl with an old invoic number caus a fraudul check to be issu
the victim compani had an autom duplic invoic test but the perpetr
circumv it substitut 1 for i and 0 zero for capit o the next dai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1521
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1522 2011 fraud examin manual
the employe would replac the true vendor name and address and mutil the check
regist so that the check payabl to the fi ctitiou vendor wa conceal approxim
300000 in fals check wa issu us thi method
alter check prepar by other tack on
the other method that can be us by perpetr to alter check prepar by other is
tack on addit letter or word to the end of the real paye design for
instanc check payabl to abc compani might be alter to read ab collin the
employe then cash the check in the name of ab collin it sound like an odd scheme
but it realli happen in these case the simpl inclus of a filler line after the paye
design would prevent the loss
in addit to alter the paye design the amount of the check can be alter by
tack on extra number if the person prepar the check is careless and leav space for
extra number in the amount portion of the check
alter check prepar by the fraudster eras ink
when the perpetr prepar the check that is to be alter the scheme tend to be a bit
more sophist the reason for thi is obviou if the perpetr is abl to prepar the
check himself he can prepar it with the thought of how the paye design will be
chang on of the most common wai to prepar a check for alter is to write or type
the paye name and possibl the amount in eras ink after an author maker sign
the check the perpetr retriev the check eras the paye name and insert hi own
in some case employe even obtain signatur on check written in pencil
exampl
a bookkeep type out small check to a local supplier and had the owner of the compani
sign them the bookkeep then us her eras typewrit to lift the paye design and
amount from the check she enter her own name as the paye and rais the amount
precipit for instanc the owner might si gn a 10 check that later becam a 10000
check these check were enter in the disburs journal as payment for aggreg
inventori to the compani largest supplier who receiv sever larg check each month
the bookkeep stole over 300000 fr om her employ in thi scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1523
where a proper separ of duti is in place a person who prepar a check should not be
permit to handl the check after it ha been sign nevertheless thi is exactli what
happen in most alter paye scheme the person who prepar the check know that the
maker of the check will return it to him after it ha been sign
alter check prepar by the fraudster blank check
the most egregi exampl of poor control in the handl of sign check is on in
which the perpetr prepar a check leav the paye design blank and submit it to an
author maker who sign the check and return it to the employe obvious thi make
it quit easi for the perpetr to design himself or an accomplic as the paye common
sens should prevent anyon from give a sign blank check to anoth person
nevertheless thi is a fairli common occurr especi when the perpetr is a trust
longtim employe
convert alter check
as with all other type of fraudul check convers is accomplish by endors the
check in the name of the paye convers of fraudul check ha alreadi been discuss
in previou section and will not be reexamin here
author maker scheme
the final check tamper scheme the author maker scheme mai be the most difficult
to defend against an author maker scheme occur when an employe with signatur
author on a compani account write fraudul check for hi own benefit and sign hi
own name as the maker see author maker scheme flowchart the perpetr in
these scheme can write and sign fraudul check himself he doe not have to alter a pre
prepar instrument or forg the maker signatur
overrid control through intimid
when a person is author to sign compani check prepar the check is easi the
employe simpli write and sign the instrument the same wai he would with ani legitim
check in most situat check signer ar owner offic or otherwis highrank
employe and thu have or can obtain access to all the blank check thei need even if
compani polici prohibit check signer from handl blank check the perpetr can
normal us hi influenc to overcom thi impedi what employe is go to tell the
ceo that he cant have a blank check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1524 2011 fraud examin manual
the most basic wai an employe accomplish an author maker scheme is to overrid
control design to prevent fraud most author signatori have high level of influenc
within their compani the perpetr us thi influenc to deflect question about
fraudul transact
a common author maker scheme is on in which a major owner or sole sharehold
us hi compani as a sort of alter ego pai person expens directli out of compani
account instead of pai person expens the perpetr might cut check directli to
himself hi friend or famili us fear of job secur as a weapon the owner can
maintain a work environ in which employe ar afraid to question these transact
highlevel manag or offic might also us their author to overrid control in
compani with absent or inattent ownership intimid can plai a larg part in the
commiss and conceal of type of occup fraud involv power individu
exampl
the manag of a sale offic stole approxim 150000 from hi employ over a two
year period thi manag had primari checksign author and abus thi power by
write compani check to pai hi person expens the manag fraudul activ
were well known by certain member of hi staff but these employe career were control
by the perpetr fear of lose their job combin with lack of a proper whistleblow
structur prevent the manag employe from report hi fraud
poor control
although overrid control is the most blatant wai to execut an author maker
scheme it is not the most common far more of these scheme occur becaus no on is
pai attent to the account and few control ar present to prevent fraud some
employe who write check to themselv or to purchas item for themselv simpli code
the check to expens account that thei know ar not like to be review
the failur to close monitor account is supplement by lack of intern control
specif the absenc of separ of duti in the cash disburs process
employe who commit author maker fraud ar often in charg of reconcil the bank
account of the busi thi is especi common in small busi employe with
total control over the disburs process ar in a perfect posit to write fraudul
check for their own benefit
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1525
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1526 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
the bookkeep of a mediums compani wa charg with pai all bill and
prepar the compani payrol she had access to an automat check signer and total
control over compani bank account the bookkeep wrote extra check to herself code
the expenditur to payrol and destroi the ca ncele check when thei were return with
the bank statement
conceal check tamper scheme
most check tamper scheme do not consist of a singl occurr but instead continu
over a period of time therefor conceal the fraud is arguabl the most import aspect
of the scheme if an employe intend to steal a larg sum of monei and escap to south
america hide the fraud might not be so import but the vast major of occup
fraudster remain employe of their compani as thei continu to steal from them which
make conceal the kei to the crime
conceal of the fraud mean not onli hide the ident of the crimin but in most
case hide the fact that a fraud ha even occur the most success fraud ar those in
which the victim organ is unawar that it is be rob obvious onc a busi
learn that it is be victim it will take step to staunch it bleed and the end of the
scheme will be at hand
check tamper scheme can present especi tricki conceal problem for dishonest
employe in other type of fraudul disburs such as invoic or payrol scheme
the fraudul payment is enter in the book as a legitim transact by someon other
than the perpetr the payment in those scheme ar gener by the product of
fals document that caus account payabl personnel to think that monei is ow to a
particular person or vendor when account payabl issu a disburs for a bogu
invoic it doe so becaus it believ the invoic to be genuin the payment is then enter
in the book as a legitim payment in other word the perpetr gener doe not have
to worri about conceal the payment in the book becaus someon els unwittingli doe
it for him but in forgeri and author maker scheme the perpetr is the on write
the check and he is usual the on code the check in the disburs journal he must
explain the check on the book
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1527
forg endors scheme and alter paye scheme ar differ becaus thei involv
the alter of check that were alreadi prepar and code by someon els
nevertheless thei creat a problem for the perpetr becaus the intercept check wa
intend for a legitim recipi someon is out there wait for the check that the
perpetr ha taken the culprit in these scheme must worri not onli about hide the
fraud from hi employ but also about appeas the intend paye
the fraudster reconcil the bank statement
a larg percentag of those who perpetr check tamper fraud ar involv in
reconcil the compani bank statement the bank statement that a compani receiv
normal includ the cancel check that have been cash in the preced period a
person who reconcil the account is therefor in a posit to hide the exist of ani
fraudul check he ha written to himself he can remov the fraudul check or doctor
the bank statement or both
in forg maker and author maker scheme the perpetr usual ha to code the
check in the disburs journal the most basic wai to hide the check is to code it as
void or to includ no list at all in the journal then when the bank statement arriv
the perpetr remov the fraudul check from the stack of return check and destroi
it now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physic evid of the
check on hand of cours the bank will have a copi of the check but unless someon
question the miss check it is unlik that the compani will discov the problem and
sinc the perpetr is the on who reconcil the account it is unlik that anyon will
even notic that the check is miss
the problem with simpli omit the fraudul check from the disburs journal is
that the bank balanc will not reconcil to the book balanc for instanc if the perpetr
wrote a 25000 check to himself and did not record it then the book balanc will be
25000 higher than the bank balanc 25000 wa taken out of the bank account by the
perpetr but wa not credit out of the compani cash account employe usual
omit their illicit check from the disburs journal onli in situat where thei
person reconcil the bank statement and no on review their work thi allow the
perpetr to forc the reconcili in ot her word the perpetr report that the
bank balanc and book balanc match when in fact thei do not
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1528 2011 fraud examin manual
some victim organ simpli do not regularli reconcil their account thi make it
easi for employe to write check without record them in a system where control ar
so lax almost ani conceal method will be effect to disguis fraud in fact it mai not
be necessari to make ani effort at all to conceal the crime
some fraudster physic alter the bank statement to caus it to match the compani book
balanc for instanc a person engag in a forg maker scheme mai decid to steal blank
check from the back of the checkbook these check ar out of sequenc and therefor will
be list last on the bank statement thi employe can delet the clump of fraudul
check at the end of the statement and alter the balanc to match the victim compani
book
realter of check
in alter paye scheme rememb that it is common for the perpetr to take a check
intend for a legitim recipi then doctor the instrument so that the perpetr
becom the design paye but a cancel check payabl to an employe will obvious
rais suspicion of fraud therefor some employe realter their fraudul check when
the bank statement arriv it ha alreadi been discuss how employe can alter check by
write the paye name in eras ink when the check is prepar these employe obtain
a signatur for the check then eras the true paye name and insert their own when the
fraudul check return with the bank statement the employe eras hi own name and re
enter the name of the proper paye thu there will be no appear of mischief
miscod fraudul check
rather than omit a fraudul check from the disburs journal or list it as void the
perpetr might write a check payabl to himself but list a differ person as the paye on
the book usual the fake paye is a regular vendor a person or busi that receiv
numer check from the victim compani employe tend to pick known vendor for
these scheme becaus on extra disburs to a regular paye is less like to be notic
than a check to an unknown person
the fraudster can also conceal a fraudul check overst the amount of legitim
disburs in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudul check for instanc
assum that a compani ow 10000 to a part icular vendor the fraudster would write a
check to the vendor for 10000 but enter the check in the disburs journal as a
15000 payment the compani disburs ar now overst by 5000 the
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1529
fraudster can write a 5000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disburs
journal the bank balanc and the book balanc will still match becaus the cost of the
fraudul check wa absorb when the amount of the legitim check wa overst of
cours the fact that the cancel check do not match the entri in the journal should
indic potenti fraud thi type of conceal is realli onli effect when the bank
account ar not close monitor or where the employe is in charg of reconcil the
account
if possibl employe will try to code their fraudul check to exist account that ar
rare review or to account that ar veri activ most of these check ar code to
expens account or liabil account thi particular method can be veri effect in
conceal fraud particularli when the victim compani is not dilig in reconcil it bank
account for instanc some organ reconcil their account by crossreferenc
check number with the amount of the check but thei do not verifi that the paye on the
actual check match the paye list in the disburs journal these organ will
be unabl to detect check that have been code to the wrong paye in the disburs
journal
reissu intercept check
in intercept check scheme the employe face detect not onli through hi employ
normal control procedur but also from the intend recipi of the stolen check when
the real paye do not receiv their check thei ar like to complain these complaint in
turn could trigger a fraud investig on wai for an employe to avoid thi problem is
to issu new check to the intend paye
exampl
an account payabl troubleshoot wa in char ge of audit payment to all supplier
review support document and mail check everi onc in a while she would
purpos fail to mail a check to a vendor the vendor of cours would call account
payabl about the late payment and would be told that hi invoic had been paid on a
certain date sinc account payabl did not have a copi of the cancel check becaus the
fraudster wa still hold it thei would call the troubleshoot to research the problem
unfortun for the compani the troubleshoot wa the on who had stolen the check
she would tell account payabl to issu anoth check to the vendor while she stop
payment on the first check thu the vendor receiv hi payment meanwhil instead of
stop payment on the first check the troubleshoot deposit it into her own account
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1530 2011 fraud examin manual
bogu support document
while some perpetr attempt to wipe out all trace of their fraudul disburs by
destroi the check forc the bank reconcili and so on other opt to justifi their
check by manufactur fake support for them these person prepar fals payment
voucher includ fals invoic purchas order andor receiv report to creat an
appear of authent thi conceal strategi is onli practic when the employe
write check payabl to someon other than himself such as an accomplic or a shell
compani a check made payabl to an employe mai rais suspicion regardless of ani
support document that he manufactur
detect of check tamper scheme
account analysi through cutoff statement
bank cutoff statement should be request for 10 to 15 dai after the close date of the
balanc sheet these statement mai be us to detect cash fraud dure period between
monthli bank statement cutoff statement ar often us by auditor to ensur that
incom and expens ar report in the proper period if employe know that at ani time
dure the month a cutoff statement mai be order and review independ cash
fraud will be less like
a cutoff statement is gener order from the bank deliv unopen to the auditor
or outsid and reconcil it can be order at ani time dure the account cycl if
cutoff bank statement ar not order or receiv obtain the follow period bank
statement and perform account analysi and investig
bank reconcili
copi of the bank reconcili and account analysi should be obtain along with the
complet set of bank statement on all check and save account as well as certif
of deposit and other interest bear and noninterest bear account from the
reconcili perform the follow test
confirm the mathemat accuraci of the reconcili
examin the bank statement for possibl alter
trace the balanc on the statement back to the bank cutoff and bank confirm
statement
foot the balanc to the compani ledger
2 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1531
trace the deposit in transit to the bank cutoff statement to ensur record in
proper period
examin cancel check and compar to the list of outstand check
sampl support document of check written for a materi amount
verifi support document on outstand check written for a materi amount
verifi accuraci of nonoperationalcash or ca shequival account cd and other
invest account analysi should includ the verif of the institut hold
the fund interest rate matur date begin and end balanc and current period
activ book and bank balanc should be compar and ani accrual of interest
analyzed3
bank confirm
anoth method relat to the cutoff statement is the bank confirm request unlik
the cutoff statement thi detect method is mere a report of the balanc in the account
as of the date request thi balanc should be request to confirm the statement balanc
as well as ani other necessari balanc date if fraud is occur at the bank reconcili
stage thi independ confirm mai prove to be veri help
checktamp red flag
the follow irregular mai indic fraud
void check mai indic employe have embezzl cash and charg the
embezzl to expens account when the expens is paid from account payabl
fraudul check ar mark and enter as void and remov from distribut point
an accountbalanc journal entri is then made the list of void check should be
verifi against physic copi of the check bank statement should be review to
ensur that void check have not been process
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be
close scrutin such an examin mai indic other scheme such as conflict of
interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens reimburs
alter endors or dual endors of return check mai indic possibl
tamper
3 id
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1532 2011 fraud examin manual
return check with obvious forg or question signatur endors should
be verifi with origin paye
alter paye on return check should be verifi with intend paye
duplic or counterfeit check indic fraud these check mai be traceabl to
depositor through bank check code
question deposit date should be match to the correspond custom account
an examin of all cash advanc mai reveal that not all advanc ar properli
document and therefor inappropri payment have been made to employe
custom complaint regard payment not be appli to their account should be
investig
a question paye or paye address on a check should trigger review of the
correspond check and support document
prevent of check tamper scheme
check disburs control
the follow list of activ will help tighten control and possibl deter employe from
give in to the temptat to commit check fraud
check cut and prepar is not done by a signatori on the account
check ar mail immedi after sign
theft control procedur ar adher to see below
account payabl record and address ar secur from possibl tamper chang in
vendor inform should be verifi
bank statement should be review dilig ensur that amount and signatur
have not been alter
bank reconcili should be complet immedi after monthli statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present
within 30 dai from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
bank reconcili ar not made by signatori on the account
bank statement should be reconcil and review by more than on person
appropri separ of duti should be document and adher to
detail comparison ar routin made between check paye and the paye list in
the cash disburs journal
personnel respons for handl and code check ar period rotat keep
total personnel involv to a minimum
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1533
bankassist control
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud consid
the follow control measur that mai be taken in regard to a firm check account
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
us posit pai bank control posit pai allow a compani and it bank to work
togeth to detect fraudul item present for payment the compani provid the
bank with a list of check and amount that ar written each dai the bank verifi item
present for payment against the compani li t the bank reject item that ar not on
the list investig ar conduct as to the origin of nonlist item
physic tamper prevent
the follow list detail checktamp prevent techniqu that ar be us todai
by some institut to secur busi check integr these method can be us
individu or in combin
signatur line void safeti band the word void appear on the check when
photocopi
rainbow foil bar a horizont color bar place on the check fade and is shade
from on bar to the next photocopi foil bar appear solid
holograph safeti border holograph imag ar creat in a wai that reflect light to
reveal a threedimension graphic
emboss pearlesc numberingcheck ar number us a techniqu that is
reveal by a color highlight pen or by a bright light held behind the check
other chemic voidscheck reveal an imag or the word void when treat with an
erad chemic
micro line print extrem small print is too small to read with the nake ey and
becom distort when photocopi
high resolut microprintingimag ar produc on the check in high resolut
2400 dot per inch or higher thi techniqu is veri difficult to reproduc
secur inkscheck contain ink that react with erad chemic reduc a
forger abil to modifi the check
chrome color the us of chromelik color deter photocopi even with
color copier the chrome pattern or number develop solid black
watermark backer hidden imag can onli be seen when the check is held at an
angl thi imag is veri difficult to reproduc
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1534 2011 fraud examin manual
ultraviolet ink thi ink displai an imag or messag when held under ultraviolet
light
check theft control procedur
it is veri import to provid intern control that will minim the possibl of check
tamper and theft below is a list of item that should be incorpor into compani
polici and procedur to help deter check tamper
new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
unus check should be store in a secur area such as a safe vault or other lock
area secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel onli routin
chang kei and access code to storag area
review all hire procedur on of the most import mean of fight fraud is to
not hire peopl with question background develop a distinct separ of duti
in the account payabl depart includ written polici and procedur for all
personnel who have the opportun to handl check from mailroom clerk to the
ceo
us electron payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
elimin the us of paper check
report lost or stolen check immedi
properli and secur store cancel check
destroi unus check for account that have been close
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
bill scheme
the asset misappropri scheme discuss up to thi pointskim larceni regist
scheme and check tamperingal requir the perpetr of the scheme to physic take
cash or check from hi employ the next three section will cover a differ kind of asset
misappropri scheme on which allow the perpetr to misappropri compani
fund without ever actual handl cash or check while at work these succe by make
a fals claim for payment upon the victim organ thi group consist of bill scheme
which attack the purchas function of a compani payrol scheme and expens reimburs
scheme the most common of these is the bill scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1535
bill scheme ar a popular form of employe fraud mainli becaus thei offer the
prospect of larg reward sinc the major of most busi disburs ar made in
the purchas cycl larger theft can be hidden through falsebil scheme than through
other kind of fraudul disburs there ar three princip type of bill scheme
fals invoic via shell compani fals invoic via nonaccomplic vendor and person
purchas made with compani fund
invoic via shell compani
form a shell compani
shell compani ar fictiti entiti creat for the purpos of commit fraud thei mai
be noth more than a fabric name and a post offic box that an employe us to
collect disburs from fals bill howev sinc the check receiv will be made
out in the name of the shell compani the perpetr will normal also set up a bank
account in hi new compani name so he can deposit and cash the fraudul check see
fals bill from shell compani flowchart
a person will probabl have to present a bank with a certif of incorpor or an
assumednam certif in order to open a bank account for a shell compani these ar
document that a compani must obtain through a state or local govern the document
can be forg but it is more like that the perpetr will simpli file the requisit
paperwork and obtain legitim document from hi state or counti thi can usual be
accomplish for a small fee the cost of which will be more than offset by a success fraud
scheme
if it is discov that a vendor is fals bill a compani investig for the victim
compani mai be abl to identifi the owner of the suspect compani by review it busi
registr file which ar a matter of public record
to avoid be detect through a record search some perpetr form their shell
compani under anoth name it is common for instanc for employe to set up shell
compani in the name of a spous or other close rel male fraudster often establish
shell compani under their wive maiden name an employe might also form the
compani under a complet fictiti name
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1536 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1537
exampl
an employe us a cowork identif to form a shell vendor the fraudster then
proceed to bill hi employ for approxim 20000 in fals servic the result
check were deposit in the account of the shell compani and currenc wa withdrawn from
the account through an atm
anoth issu involv in form a shell compani is the entiti addressth place where
fraudul check will be collect often an employe rent a post offic box and list it as
the mail address of hi shell compani some employe list their home address instead a
comparison of employe address to vendor address might reveal shell compani in an
account payabl system
exampl
a depart head set up a dummi compani us ing hi resid as the mail address
over a twoyear period thi man submit over 250000 worth of fals invoic
eventu the scheme wa detect by a newli hire clerk the clerk wa process an
invoic when she notic that the address of the vendor wa the same as her bosss address
by a lucki coincid the clerk had type a person letter for her boss earlier that dai
and rememb hi address had the depart head us a po box instead of hi
home address on the invoic hi scheme might have continu indefinit
employe often us their home address to collect fraudul disburs becaus
mani busi ar wari of send check to vendor that have a post offic box for a
mail address other common collect site for shell compani scheme ar the address
of rel friend or accomplic
submit fals invoic
onc a shell compani ha been form and a bank account ha been open the corrupt
employe begin bill hi employ invoic can be manufactur by variou mean such
as a profession printer a person comput or a typewrit fals invoic do not alwai
have to be of profession qualiti to gener fraudul disburs typewritten
invoic ar often suffici to gener check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1538 2011 fraud examin manual
selfapprov of fraudul invoic
the difficulti in a shell compani scheme is not usual in produc the invoic but in
get the victim organ to pai them author for the fictiti purchas and
therefor payment of the bill is the kei in a larg percentag of shell compani case the
perpetr is in a posit to approv payment on the veri invoic he is fraudul
submit it is obviou the duti of prepar and approv voucher should be separ
to avoid thi kind of scheme
in compani where a proper separ of duti exist the employe with approv
author sometim creat fraudul voucher or purchas order and forg the signatur
of the person who is in charg of prepar these document then the perpetr approv
payment on the fraudul voucher he ha gener thi make it appear that two
employe have sign off on the voucher as mandat by the victim organ
control
not all compani requir the complet of payment voucher befor thei will issu check
in some enterpris check ar written base on less formal procedur such as the
submiss of check request these request simpli list the name of the paye the
amount to be paid and a brief narr state the reason for the check obvious thi is
not a veri sound procedur for prevent fraud dishonest employe have littl troubl
run shell compani scheme in organ that oper thi wai
rubber stamp supervisor
if an employe cannot author payment himself the next best thing is if the person who
ha that author is inattent or overli trust rubber stamp supervisor like thi ar
destin to be target by uneth employe in some case supervisor ar attent to
the purchas order thei ar ask to author but thei lack the technic knowledg to
spot fraud as it is happen for instanc a manag or administr might not complet
understand the cost associ with upgrad comput softwar to modern a work
area thi manag will have to reli on hi subordin who have the necessari technic
expertis to determin that cost ar be kept in line the subordin mai be abl to take
advantag of thi situat to caus the compani to overpai for the equip requir to
upgrad the system
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1539
relianc on fals document
when an employe doe not have approv author for purchas and doe not have the
benefit of a rubber stamp supervisor he must run hi voucher through the normal account
payabl process the success of thi kind of scheme will depend on the appar authent
of the fals voucher he creat if the perpetr can gener purchas order and receiv
report that corrobor the inform on the fraudul invoic from hi shell compani
he can fool account payabl into issu a check
collus
collus among sever employe is sometim us to overcom welldesign intern
control for exampl in a compani with proper separ of duti the function of
purchas good or servic author the purchas receiv the good or servic and
make the payment to the vendor should all be separ if thi process is strictli adher
to it will be extrem difficult for ani singl employe to commit a falsebil scheme but
if sever employe work togeth thei can overcom the intern control of their
employ
exampl
a warehous foreman and a part order clerk conspir to purchas approxim
300000 of nonexist suppli the part order clerk would initi the fals
transact by obtain approv to place order for part he claim were need the
order were then sent to a vendor who act in conjunct with the two employe
fraudster prepar fals invoic which were sent to the victim compani meanwhil the
warehous foreman verifi receipt of the fi ctitiou shipment of incom suppli the
perpetr were therefor abl to compil complet voucher for the fraudul purchas
without overstep their normal duti
even if all intern control ar observ at some point a compani must reli on it
employe to be honest on of the purpos of separ duti is to prevent ani on
person from have too much control over a particular busi function it provid a builtin
monitor mechan where everi person action ar in some wai verifi by anoth
person but if everyon is corrupt even proper control will not prevent fraud
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1540 2011 fraud examin manual
purchas of servic rather than good
most shell compani scheme involv the purchas of servic rather than good the
primari reason for thi is that servic ar not tangibl if an employe set up a shell
compani to make fictiti sale of good to hi employ these good will obvious never
arriv by compar it purchas to it inventori level the victim organ might
detect the fraud it is much more difficult on the other hand for the victim organ to
verifi that the servic were never render for thi reason mani employe involv in
shell compani scheme bill their employ for thing like consult servic
passthrough scheme
in most shell compani scheme victim organ ar bill for complet fictiti
purchas of good or servic howev there is a subcategori of shellcompani scheme
in which actual good or servic ar sold to the victim compani these ar known as passthrough
scheme
passthrough scheme ar usual undertaken by employe in charg of purchas on
behalf of the victim compani instead of bui merchandis directli from a vendor the
employe set up a shell compani and purchas the merchandis through that fictiti
entiti he then resel the merchandis to hi employ from the shell compani at an
inflat price
exampl
a depart director wa put in charg of purchas comput equip becaus of hi
expertis on the subject and hi high stand within the compani he wa unsupervis in
thi task the director set up a shell compani in anoth state and bought us comput
through the shell compani then turn around and sold them to hi employ at a greatli
exagger price the monei from the victim compani first instal on the comput
wa us to pai the shell compani debt to the real vendor subsequ payment were
profit for the bogu compani the scheme cost the victim compani over 1 million
invoic via nonaccomplic vendor
payandreturn scheme
instead of us shell compani in their overbil scheme some employe gener
fraudul disburs by us the invoic of legitim thirdparti vendor who ar not
a part of the fraud scheme in a payandreturn scheme an employe intention mishandl
payment that ar ow to legitim vendor see pai and return scheme flowchart
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1541
on wai to do thi is to purpos doublep ay an invoic for instanc a clerk might
intention pai an invoic twice then call the vendor and request that on of the check be
return the clerk then intercept the return check
anoth wai to accomplish a payandreturn scheme is to intention pai the wrong
vendor in thi type of scheme an employe send vendor as check to vendor b after the
check ar mail the employe call the vendor to explain the mistak and request that
thei return the check to hi attent when the check arriv the employe convert them
and keep the monei the employe usual run the voucher through the account payabl
system a second time so that the vendor eventu get their monei
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1542 2011 fraud examin manual
an employe might also pai the proper vendor but intention overpai him onc again
the employe contact the vendor thi time to request that the excess payment be return
final an employe might intention purchas excess merchandis return the excess and
pocket the refund
overbil with a nonaccomplic vendor invoic
in most instanc where an employe creat fraudul invoic to overbil hi employ he
us a shell compani it is not as common for an employe to submit the invoic of an
exist vendor nevertheless in some instanc an employe will undertak such a scheme
by alter an exist vendor invoic or by creat a counterfeit copi of a vendor
invoic form
person purchas with compani fund
instead of undertak bill scheme to gener cash mani fraudster simpli purchas
person item with their compani monei compani account ar us to bui item for
employe their busi their famili and so on
person purchas through fals invoic
employe who undertak purchas scheme mai do so by run unsanct invoic
through the account payabl system the perpetr in thi type of scheme bui an item
and submit the bill to hi employ as if it repres a legitim compani expens the
victim compani end up unknowingli bui good or servic for a dishonest employe
see invoic purchas scheme flowchart
the fraudster as author of invoic
the person who engag in a purchas scheme is often the veri person in the compani
whose duti includ author purchas obvious proper control should preclud
anyon from approv hi own purchas such poorli separ function leav littl other
than hi conscienc to dissuad an employe from fraud fraud aris in part becaus of a
perceiv opportun an employe who see that no on is review hi action is more
like to turn to fraud than on who know hi compani work dilig to detect employe
theft
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1543
exampl
a manag of a remot locat of a larg publicli trade compani wa author to
order suppli and approv vend or invoic for payment for over a year the manag
routin ad person item and suppli for hi own busi to order made on behalf
of hi employ the order often includ a strang mix of item for instanc technic
suppli and home furnish might be purchas in the same order becaus the manag
wa in a posit to approv hi own purcha se he could get awai with such blatantli
obviou fraud in addit to order person item the perpetr chang the deliveri
address for certain suppli so that thei would be deliv directli to hi home or side
busi thi scheme cost the victim comp ani approxim 300000 in unnecessari
purchas
in some situat the perpetr is author to approv purchas but control prevent
him from also initi purchas request thi procedur is suppos to prevent an
employe from purchas person item with compani fund unfortun those with
author to approv purchas often have a good deal of control over their subordin
these person can us their influenc to forc subordin to assist in purchas scheme
in other case the manag might simpli initi the purchas order himself by forg the
subordin signatur
exampl
purchas for under 1000 at a certain util compani could be made with limit valu
purchas order lpo which requir the signatur of two peopl the origin of a
purchas request and the approv of the request an lpo attach to an invoic for less
than 1000 would be paid by the account payabl depart in thi case a manag
bought good and servic on compani account and prepar lpo for the purchas in
some case the lpo would fals describ the item to conceal the natu re of the purchas
onc the lpo wa prepar the manag forc a clerk in hi depart to sign the
document as the origin of the transact the clerk in timid by her boss did not
question the authent of the lpo with two signatur affix the lpo appear to
be legitim and the bill were paid the sche me cost the victim compani at least 25000
fals purchas requisit
if an employe doe not have purchas author he mai get approv for a fraudul
purchas by misrepres the natur of the acquisit in mani compani those with
the power to author purchas ar not alwai attent to their duti if a trust
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1544 2011 fraud examin manual
subordin sai that the compani need to bui a certain item or item busi supervisor
often give rubber stamp approv to the purchas requisit addition employe
sometim misrepres the natur of the item thei ar purchas in order to pass a
cursori review by their superior
exampl
an engin bought over 30000 worth of person item the engin dealt directli with
vendor and wa also in charg of overse the receipt of the materi he purchas he
wa therefor abl to misrepres the natur of the merchandis he bought list it as
mainten item vendor invoic were alter to agre to thi descript
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1545
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1546 2011 fraud examin manual
if the perpetr falsifi hi purchas requisit in thi manner the fraud should be
detect when deliveri occur for exampl if the purchas requisit sai mainten
item but the vendor deliv home furnish it will be obviou that the perpetr ha
commit fraud the problem of deliveri can be avoid if the perpetr is in charg of
receiv incom shipment he can verifi that deliveri of mainten item wa
receiv thi is a breach of separ of duti but unfortun it is fairli common for
purchas agent to verifi deliveri of their own order even if the victim organ
enforc a central deliveri point the perpetr might enlist the aid of an accomplic in
the receiv depart to falsifi the organ receiv report
anoth wai to avoid detect at the deliveri stage is to chang the deliveri address for
purchas instead of be ship to the victim organ the item that the employe
bui ar sent directli to hi home or busi the perpetr might also order the good
drop ship to a remot locat
person purchas on credit card or other compani account
instead of run fals invoic through account payabl some employe make person
purchas on compani credit card or on run account with vendor see purchas
on credit card or compani account flowchar t unlik invoic scheme prior approv
for these purchas is not requir an employe with a compani credit card can bui an
item mere by sign hi name or forg someon els at the time of purchas later
review of the credit card statement howev mai detect the fraudul purchas
unfortun mani highlevel employe approv their own credit card expens make it
veri easi to carri out a purchas scheme
of cours onli certain employe ar author to us compani credit card employe
without thi privileg can onli make fraudul purchas with a compani card if thei first
manag to get hold of on to thi end compani card ar sometim stolen or borrow
from author user
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1547
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1548 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an account fals ad her name to a list of employe to whom card were to be
issu she us her card to make fraudul purchas but forg the signatur of
author cardhold to cover her track sinc no on knew she even had a compani
card she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someon question the
purchas for over five year thi employe continu her scheme rack up a six figur
bill on her employ account in addit she had control of the credit card statement and
wa abl to code her purchas to variou expens account therebi further delai
detect of her crime
anoth wai to conceal a credit card purchas scheme is to doctor the credit card
statement so that fraudul purchas do not show up some employe go so far as to
destroi the real credit card statement and produc counterfeit copi on which their
fraudul purchas ar omit
return merchandis for cash
the fraudul purchas scheme discuss to thi point have all involv fals purchas
of merchandis for the sake of obtain the merchandis in some case howev an
employe bui item and then return them for cash
exampl
an employe made fraudul gain from a busi travel account the employe scheme
began by purchas ticket for herself and her famili through her compani travel budget
poor separ of duti allow the fraudster to order the ticket receiv them prepar
claim for payment and distribut check the onli review of her activ wa made by a
busi and rather uninterest supervisor who approv the employe claim without
requir support document eventu the employe scheme evolv she began to
purchas airlin ticket and return them for their cash valu an employe of the travel
agenc assist in the scheme by encod the ticket as though the fraudster had paid for
them herself that caus the airlin to pai refund directli to the fraudster rather than to
her employ in the cours of two year thi employe embezzl over 100000 through
her purchas scheme
detect of bill scheme
becaus there ar mani variat of purchas fraud scheme there ar also sever
detect method detect method ar most effect when us in combin each
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1549
detect method is like to point out anomali that can then be investig further to
determin if a fraud scheme ha occur or is current underwai addition the
detect method will point out the weak in intern control and alert the auditor to
potenti opportun for futur fraud scheme
analyt review
a review of the variou gener ledger account might reveal unusu or unexpect event
these event could be undetect purchas fraud for exampl a comparison of inventori
purchas in relationship to net sale might indic that purchas ar too high or too low
for that level of sale thi might be a red flag indic excess purchas scheme or
fictiti sale scheme respect
anoth analyt method us a comparison of the inventori purchas of prior year with
those of the current year thi comparison might indic that an overbil scheme or a
duplicatepay scheme is in progress
analys such as those describ abov can be perform for ani acquisit of good or
servic of a compani analyt review ar most effect in detect fraud scheme that
ar larg such that the anomali will be appar other detect method ar more
effect for fraud scheme that ar smaller in relationship to the financi statement taken
as a whole regardless of fraud size examin of sourc document will be necessari
when an anomali is detect further investig is requir which will demand an
examin of sourc document
computerassist analyt review
the comput can assist the auditor in determin the presenc of unusu pattern in the
acquisit or purchas function the comput can provid the auditor with a matrix of
the purchas activ to determin the presenc of unusu pattern an analysi of the
follow data might uncov purchas scheme such as
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1550 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud scheme detect method
fictiti vendor vendor and employe with match address
more than on vendor with the same address
vendor with onli post offic box address
overbil
unusu or onetim extra charg
conflict of interest vendor with employe who ar employe famili member
an unusu high occurr of complaint
complaint about specif vendor
higher price andor substandard qualiti
statist sampl
as with inventori the sourc document for purchas can be statist sampl and
examin for irregular statist sampl can be drawn to test specif attribut thi
detect method is particularli effect if a singl attribut is suspect such as fictiti
vendor a list of all post offic box address might reveal fictiti vendor
vendor or outsid complaint
fraudul scheme will often unravel becaus a vendor or other outsid complain to the
employ or compani complaint from custom vendor and other ar good detect
tool that can lead the fraud examin to further inquiri
site visit observ
a site visit will often reveal much about the intern control or lack thereof for ani
locat the observ of how the account transact ar actual transcrib will
sometim alert the fraud examin to potenti problem area
sampl audit program
the follow audit program mai be benefici in detect red flag to bill scheme
doe the compani have a purchas depart if ye is it independ of 1 the
account depart 2 the receiv depart or 3 the ship depart
ar purchas made onli after the respect depart head sign purchas
requisit
ar purchas made by mean of purchas order sent to vendor for all purchas or
onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price term deliveri
requir and date
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1551
is a list of unfil purchas order maintain and review period
ar purchas order form prenumb and is the sequenc account for period
doe the client maintain an approv vendor list
ar item purchas onli after competit bid ar obtain if so ar competit bid
obtain for all purchas or onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
is a log maintain of all receipt
doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv if ye
ar receiv report 1 prepar for all item 2 prepar onli for item that have
purchas order or 3 renumb
at the time the item ar receiv doe someon independ of the purchas
depart check the merchandis befor accept as to descript quantiti
and condit
ar copi of receiv report 1 furnish to the account depart 2 furnish
to the purchas depart or 3 file in the receiv depart
ar receipt under blanket purchas order monitor and ar quantiti exceed
author total return to the vendor
ar procedur adequ for the proper account for partial deliveri of
purchas order
ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat
liabil is record
ar invoic check as to price extens foot freight charg allow and
credit term
ar control adequ to ensur that all avail discount ar taken
ar purchas record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process
through cash disburs
doe a respons employe assign the appropri gener ledger account distribut
to which the invoic ar to be post
ar procedur adequ to ensur that invoic have been process befor payment
and to prevent duplic payment eg a block stamp
doe a respons offici approv invoic for payment
ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to
custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and
a payabl
ar record of good return to vendor match to vendor credit memo
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1552 2011 fraud examin manual
ar unmatch receiv report purchas order and vendor invoic period
review and investig for proper record
is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
ar statement from vendor regularli review and reconcil against record
liabil
do adjust to account payabl eg write off of debit balanc requir the
approv of a design offici
ar budget us if ye ar bu dget approv by respons offici and ar actual
expenditur compar with budget amount and varianc analyz and explain
if excess inventori purchas is suspect verifi that all inventori purchas wa
receiv receiv report at the proper locat an examin of receiv report or
invoic might reveal altern ship site
prevent of bill scheme
the prevent of purchas fraud can be especi difficult purchas personnel ar
often held to a differ standard than other employe of a compani for exampl sale
peopl often ar given induc or perquisit in order to persuad potenti custom
these same induc ar offer to the purchas personnel of the compani from the
compani vendor and yet the compani ex pect the purchas personnel to perform
their function without bia and to make decis that ar in the best interest of the
compani without regard to the induc offer by supplier addition the
personnel involv in the purchas and payment function ar gener not compens
on a basi commensur with their perform as ar salespeopl therefor there is a
revers incent to perform in the best interest of the compani
probabl the most effect purchas fraud prevent measur is educ train of
the purchas and payabl personnel the second most effect purchas fraud
prevent measur is an object compens arrang with peopl respons for
purchas decis
educ train
purchas personnel should be train thoroughli in ethic situat the nation
associ of purchas manag ha a code of ethic for it certifi purchas
manag as a deterr to fraud compani might consid enrol and certif
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1553
compens
peopl respons for the purchas decis buyer should be paid well enough to
reduc the motiv and ration for fraud auditor can examin the compens of
purchas and determin if ani buyer were recent pass over for rais thi might be
an indic of discont that could lead to the format of a fraudul scheme against
the employ
proper document
proper document for purchas should includ prenumb and control purchas
requisit purchas order receiv report and check
proper approv
befor ad a vendor to the list there should be an investig of the propos
vendor perform by someon other than the personnel in purchas and account
payabl if a vendor number is requir befor payment is made and the personnel
respons for the investig assign the vendor that identif number then the
buyer cannot place fictiti vendor on the list larg or unusu purchas should be
approv by someon independ of the purchas depart
segreg of duti
for the best result and account each compani suffici in size should have a
separ purchas depart regardless of the compani size the purchas function
should be separ from the payment function
hotlin
compani should studi the feasibl of instal hotlin to provid a forum for
complaint by employe and outsid
competit bid
ensur that bid polici and procedur ar thoroughli review whenev possibl
enforc competit bid after the bid process ha been complet a questionnair
can be sent to success and unsuccess bidder thi questionnair can reveal area to not
onli make the bid process more effect but it also can provid a forum for bidder to
express concern over question or fraudul activ
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1554 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent checklist
the follow is a list of bill scheme prevent method that mai be help in the
deterr of bill fraud
author procedur of purchas order invoic and payment should be
document and adher to
the account payabl list of vendor should be period review for strang vendor
and address
payment code should be review for abnorm descript
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level on both a monthli and yearli
basi
purchas and inventori level should be compar and analyz see inventori and
other asset
control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number should be
in place
a separ of duti between author purchas receiv ship and
account should be in place
payment of voucher should be period review to ensur integr of proper
document
receiv and ship report should be review for complet and accuraci
asset inform should includ purchas trail and other inform
journal entri to inventori account should be strictli scrutin
appropri bank reconcili and review procedur should be perform
period check for outofplac vendor and endors
credit card statement should be review often for irregular
the valid of invoic with a post offic box address should be verifi
proper control for the receipt and handl of return to sender check should be
instal
payrol fraud
payrol scheme ar similar to bill scheme the perpetr of these fraud produc
fals document which caus the victim compani to unknowingli make a fraudul
disburs in bill scheme the fals document is usual an invoic coupl perhap
with fals receiv report purchas order and purchas author in payrol
scheme the perpetr typic falsifi a timecard or alter inform in the payrol
record the major differ between payrol scheme and bill scheme is that payrol
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1555
fraud involv disburs to employe rather than to extern parti the most
common payrol fraud ar ghost employe scheme falsifi hour and salari scheme and
commiss scheme
ghost employe
the term ghost employe refer to someon on the payrol who doe not actual work for the
victim compani through the falsif of personnel or payrol record a fraudster caus
paycheck to be gener to a ghost the fraudster or an accomplic then convert these
paycheck see ghost employe flowchart the ghost employe mai be a fictiti
person or a real individu who simpli doe not work for the victim employ when the
ghost is a real person it is often a friend or rel of the perpetr
in order for a ghost employe scheme to work four thing must happen 1 the ghost must
be ad to the payrol 2 timekeep and wage rate inform must be collect 3 a
paycheck must be issu to the ghost and 4 the check must be deliv to the perpetr
or an accomplic
ad the ghost to the payrol
the first step in a ghost employe scheme is enter the ghost on the payrol in some
busi all hire is done through a central personnel depart while in other the
personnel function is spread over the manageri respons of variou depart
regardless of how hire of new employe is handl within a busi it is the person or
person with author to add new employe and remov termin employe that ar in
the best posit to put ghost on the payrol
exampl
a manag who wa respons for hire and schedul janitori work ad over 80
ghost employe to hi payrol the ghost in thi case were actual peopl who work at
other job for differ compani the manag fill out time sheet for the fictiti
employe and author them then took the result paycheck to the ghost employe
who cash them and split the proce with the manag it wa thi manag author
in the hire and supervis of employe that enabl him to perpetr thi fraud
employe in payrol account also sometim creat ghost employe in a perfect world
everi name list on the payrol would be verifi against personnel record to make sure
that those person receiv paycheck actual work for the compani but in practic thi
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1556 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not alwai happen thu person in payrol account mai be abl to creat fictiti
employe by simpli ad a new name to the payrol record access to these record is
usual restrict with onli highlevel employe have the abil to make chang to the
payrol these person would therefor be among the most like suspect in a ghost
employe scheme on the other hand lower level employe sometim gain access to
restrict payrol inform and should not be disregard as possibl suspect
exampl
an employe in the payrol depart wa gi ven the author to enter new employe into
the payrol system make correct to payrol inform and distribut paycheck thi
employe manag gave rubberstamp approv to the employe action becaus of a
trust relationship between the two the lack of separ of duti and the absenc of
review made it simpl for the culprit to add a fictiti employe into the payrol system
on wai perpetr try to conceal the presenc of a ghost on the payrol is to creat a
ghost with a name veri similar to that of a real employe the name on the fraudul
paycheck then will appear to be legitim to anyon who glanc at it for instanc if a
victim organ ha an employe name john doe the ghost mai be name john
doer
instead of ad new name to the payrol some employe undertak ghost employe
scheme when thei fail to remov the name of termin employe paycheck to the
termin employe continu to be gener even though the employe no longer work
for the victim organ the perpetr intercept these fraudul paycheck and
convert them to hi own us
collect timekeep inform
the second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issu to a ghost employe
at least in the case of hourli employe is the collect and comput of timekeep
inform the perpetr must provid payrol account with a timecard or other
instrument show how mani hour the fictiti employe work over the most recent
pai period thi inform along with the wage rate inform contain in personnel
or payrol file will be us to comput the amount of the fraudul paycheck
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1557
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1558 2011 fraud examin manual
timekeep record can be maintain in a varieti of wai employe might manual
record their hour on timecard or punch time clock that record the time at which a person
start and finish hi work in more sophist environ comput system can
track an employe hour
when a ghost employe scheme is in place someon must creat document for the
ghost hour thi essenti amount to prepar a fake timecard show when the ghost
wa allegedli present at work depend upon the normal procedur for record hour a
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost name punch the time
clock for the ghost and so on the prepar of the timecard is not a great obstacl to the
perpetr the real kei is obtain approv of the timecard
a supervisor should approv the timecard of hourli employe befor paycheck ar issu
thi verifi to the payrol depart that the employe actual work the hour that ar
claim on the card a ghost employe by definit doe not work for the victim
organ so approv will have to be fraudul obtain often the supervisor
himself is the on who creat the ghost when thi is the case the supervisor fill out a
timecard in the name of the ghost then affix hi own approv the timecard is therebi
authent and a paycheck will be issu when a nonsupervisor is commit a ghost
employe scheme he will typic forg the necessari approv then forward the bogu
timecard directli to payrol account bypass hi supervisor
in computer system a supervisor signatur might not be requir in lieu of thi the
supervisor input data into the payrol system and the us of hi password serv to
author the entri if an employe ha access to the supervisor password he can input
data for the ghost which will appear in the payrol system with a seal of approv
if the perpetr creat ghost who ar salari rather than hourli employe it is not
necessari to collect timekeep inform salari employe ar paid a certain amount
each pai period regardless of how mani hour thei work becaus the timekeep function
can be avoid it mai be easier for a perpetr to creat a ghost employe who work on
salari howev most busi have fewer salari employe and thei ar more like to
be member of manag the salari ghost mai therefor be more difficult to conceal
issu the ghost paycheck
onc a ghost is enter on the payrol and hi timecard ha been approv the third step in
the scheme is the actual issuanc of the paycheck the heart of a ghost employe scheme is
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1559
in the falsif of payrol record and timekeep inform onc thi falsif
ha occur the perpetr doe not gener take an activ role in the issuanc of the
check the payrol depart print the checkbas on the bogu inform provid
by the perpetratora it would ani other paycheck
deliveri of the paycheck
the final step in a ghost employe scheme is the distribut of the check to the
perpetr paycheck might be hand deliv to employe while at work mail to
employe at their home address or most commonli now directli deposit into the
employe bank account if employe ar paid in currenc rather than by check the
distribut is almost alwai conduct inperson and onsit
ideal those in charg of payrol distribut should not have a hand in ani of the other
function of the payrol cycl for instanc the person who enter new employe in the
payrol system should not be allow to distribut paycheck becaus thi person can includ
a ghost on the payrol then simpli pocket the fraudul check when paycheck ar be
disburs obvious when the perpetr of a ghost employe scheme is allow to mail
check to employe or pass them out at work he is in a perfect posit to ensur that the
ghost check is deliv to himself
in most instanc the perpetr doe not have the author to distribut paycheck and so
must make sure that the victim organ send the check to a place where he can
recov them when check ar not distribut in the workplac thei ar usual mail to
employe or deposit directli into those employe account
if the fictiti employe wa ad into the payrol or personnel record by the perpetr
the problem of distribut is usual minor when the ghost employ inform is
enter the perpetr simpli list an address or bank account to which the payment can
be sent in the case of pure fictiti ghost employe the address is often the
perpetr own the same goe for bank account the fact that two employe the
perpetr and the ghost ar receiv payment at the same destin mai indic
payrol fraud some fraudster avoid thi duplic by have payment sent to a post
offic box or a separ bank account
rememb that a ghost employe is not alwai a fictiti person it mai instead be a real
person who is conspir with the perpetr to defraud the compani for exampl some
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1560 2011 fraud examin manual
employe place their rel or spous on the compani payrol when real person ar
fals includ on the payrol the check ar sent to the home or account of these
person
distribut is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employe who wa
simpli not remov from the payrol if paycheck ar distribut through the mail or by
direct deposit the perpetr will have to enter the termin employe record and
chang their deliveri inform in compani where paycheck ar distribut by hand or
ar held at a central locat for employe to collect the perpetr can ignor the payrol
record and simpli pick up the fraudul paycheck
falsifi hour and salari
the most common method of misappropri fund from the payrol is the overpay
of wage for hourli employe the size of a paycheck is base on two factor the number
of hour work and the rate of pai it is therefor obviou that for an hourli employe to
fraudul increas the size of hi paycheck he must either falsifi the number of hour he
ha work or chang hi wage rate see falsifi hour and salari flowchart sinc
salari employe do not receiv compens base on their time at work in most case
these employe gener fraudul wage by increas their rate of pai
when discuss payrol fraud that involv overst hour on must first understand how
an employe time at work is record time is gener kept by on of three method
time clock mai be us to mark the time when an employe begin and finish work the
employe insert a card into the clock at the begin and end of work and the time is
imprint on that card in more sophist system comput mai track the time
employe spend on the job base on login code or a similar indic final timecard
show the number of hour an employe work on a particular dai ar often prepar
manual by the employe and approv by hi manag
manual prepar timecard
when hour ar record manual an employe typic fill out hi timecard to reflect the
number of hour he ha work then present it to hi supervisor for approv the
supervisor verifi the accuraci of the timecard sign the card to indic hi approv then
forward it to the payrol depart so that a paycheck can be issu
if an employe fill out hi own timecard it is easi to falsifi the number of hour work
he simpli write down fals inform show that he arriv at work earlier or left later
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1561
than he actual did the difficulti is not in falsifi the timecard but in get the
fraudul card approv by the employe supervisor there ar basic three wai for
the employe to obtain the author he need
forg a supervisor signatur
when us thi method an employe typic withhold hi timecard from those be sent
to the supervisor for approv forg the supervisor signatur or initi then add the
timecard to the stack of author card which ar sent to the payrol depart the
fraudul timecard arriv at the payrol depart with what appear to be a supervisor
approv and a paycheck is subsequ issu
collus with a supervisor
the second wai to obtain approv of a fraudul timecard is to collud with a supervisor
who author timekeep inform in these scheme a supervisor knowingli sign
fals timecard and the employe kick back a portion of the overpaid wage to the
supervisor in some case the supervisor mai take the entir amount of the overpay it
mai be particularli difficult to detect payrol fraud when a supervisor collud with an
employe becaus manag ar often reli upon as a control to ensur proper
timekeep
exampl
a supervisor assign employe to better work area or better job but in return she
demand payment the payment wa arrang by the falsif of the employe
timecard which the supervisor author the employe we re compens for fictiti
overtim which wa kick back to the supervisor
rubber stamp supervisor
the third wai to obtain approv of fraudul timecard is to reli on a supervisor to
approv them without review their accuraci the lazi manag method seem riski and
on would think that it would be uncommon but the truth is that it occur quit frequent
a recur theme in occup fraud scheme is the relianc of perpetr on the
inattent of other when an employe see an opportun to make a littl extra
monei without get caught that employe is more like to be embolden to attempt a
fraud scheme the fact that a supervisor is known to rubber stamp timecard or even
ignor them can be a factor in an employe decis to begin steal from hi compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1562 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1563
exampl
a temporari employe notic that hi manag did not reconcil the expens journal
monthli thu the manag did not know ho w much wa be paid to the temporari
agenc the fraudster complet fictiti time report which were sent to the temporari
agenc and which caus the victim compani to pai over 30000 in fraudul wage
sinc the fraudster control the mail and the manag did not review the expens journal
thi extrem simpl scheme went undetect for some time
poor custodi procedur
on form of control breakdown that often occur is the failur to maintain proper control
over timecard in a properli run system timecard that have been author by
manag should be sent directli to payrol those who prepar the timecard should not
have access to them after thei have been approv if thi separ of duti is not
observ the person who prepar a timecard can alter it after hi supervisor ha approv
the timecard but befor it is deliv to payrol for instanc the employe might fill out hi
timecard in eras ink obtain hi supervisor signatur on the timecard and then chang
the hour reflect on the timecard so that he will be overcompens
anoth wai hour ar falsifi is in the misreport of leav time thi is not as common
as timecard falsif but it doe occur with some frequenc incident thi is the on
instanc in which salari employe commit payrol fraud by falsifi their hour a leav
time scheme is veri simpl an employe take a certain amount of time off of work as paid
leav or vacat but doe not report thi leav time employe typic receiv a certain
amount of paid leav per year if a person take a leav of absenc but doe not report it
those dai ar not deduct from hi allot dai off in other word he get more leav
time than he is entitl to the result is that the employe show up for work less yet still
receiv the same pai
time clock and other autom timekeep system
in compani that us time clock to collect timekeep inform payrol fraud is usual
uncompl in the typic scenario the time clock is locat in an unrestrict area and a
timecard for each employe is kept nearbi the employe insert their timecard into the
time clock at the begin and end of their shift and the clock imprint the time the
length of time an employe spend at work is thu record supervisor should be present
at the begin and end of shift to ensur that employe do not punch the timecard of
absent cowork but thi simpl control is often overlook without proper supervis
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1564 2011 fraud examin manual
employe can punch the timecard of absent cowork so that it appear the absent
employe wa at work that dai the absent employe is therefor overcompens on hi
next paycheck
rate of pai
it should be rememb that an employe can also receiv a larger paycheck by chang
hi pai rate an employe personnel or payr oll record reflect hi rate of pai if an
employe can gain access to these record or ha an accomplic with access to them he can
adjust them so that he receiv a larger paycheck
commiss scheme
commiss is a form of compens calcul as a percentag of the amount of
transact a salesperson or other employe gener it is a uniqu form of compens
that is not base on hour work or a set yearli salari but rather on an employe revenu
output a commiss employe wage ar base on two factor the amount of sale he
gener and the percentag of those sale he is paid in other word there ar two wai an
employe on commiss can fraudul increas hi pai 1 falsifi the amount of sale
made or 2 increas hi rate of commiss see commiss scheme flowchart
fictiti sale
establish unobtain sale quota that employe think ar arbitrari will increas the
pressur to establish fictiti perform level if the pressur becom signific the
employe might resort to ad fictiti sale and account receiv to meet the sale
quota
an employe can falsifi the amount of sale he ha made in on of two wai the first be
the creation of fictiti sale the manner in which fictiti sale ar creat depend on
the industri in which the perpetr oper fictiti sale might be construct by the
creation of fraudul sale order purchas order credit author pack slip
invoic and so on on the other hand a culprit might simpli ring up a fals sale on a cash
regist the kei is that a fictiti sale is creat that it appear to be legitim and that
the victim organ react by issu a commiss check to the perpetr
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1565
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1566 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an unscrupul insur agent took advant ag of hi compani incent commiss
which paid 125 for everi 100 of premium gener in the first year of a polici the
agent wrote polici to fictiti custom paid the premium and receiv hi
commiss which creat an illicit profit on the transact for instanc if the fraudster
paid 100000 in premium he would receiv 125000 in commiss a 25000
profit no payment were made on the fr audul polici after the first year
if a salesperson primari compens is base on sale without regard to collect then
there is an incent to produc quantiti rather than qualiti sale it is natur for compani
to push for higher sale level to sustain growth if the salesperson compens is base
sole on quantiti and not on a combin of quantiti and qualiti howev then the
compens incent is misplac thi might creat an atmospher which if coupl
with opportun will produc inflat or fictiti sale
alter sale
the second wai for a fraudster to overst the amount of sale he ha made is to alter the
price list on sale document in other word the perpetr charg on price to a
custom but record a higher price in the compani book thi caus the victim compani
to pai a larger commiss than the perpetr deserv to make these scheme work the
employe might have to intercept and alter the invoic that ar sent to the custom the
invoic the compani send out will reflect a higher purchas price than the custom agre
to so if the custom receiv these invoic he is like to complain about the discrep
the employe mai also overst the revenu receiv from hi custom
alter commiss rate
as mention abov the other wai to manipul the commiss process is to chang the
employe rate of commiss thi would like necessit the alter of payrol or
personnel record which should be offlimit to the sale staff
detect of payrol scheme
independ payrol distribut
ghost employe scheme can be uncov by have personnel other than the payrol
depart distribut the payrol check or paystub and by requir posit identif
of the paye howev as more and more compani ar move to a directdeposit payrol
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1567
with pai stub avail for view onlin handdeliv paycheck or paystub is
becom an obsolet method of detect ghost employe
analysi of paye address or account
if payrol check ar either mail or deposit automat then a list of duplic
address or deposit account mai reveal ghost employe or duplic payment
duplic identif number
becaus each employe is requir to have a governmentissu identif number such
as a social secur or social insur number a list of duplic number mai reveal
ghost employe
overtim author
requir employe to have overtim author by a supervisor have the supervisor be
respons for the timecard and have the supervisor refer the timecard directli to
payrol will aid in reduc overtim abus in addit the payrol depart should scan
the time report and question obviou abus such as onli on employe work overtim
in a depart or excess overtim on a timecard by examin the sourc
document on mai detect unauthor overtim and falsifi hour abus
commiss
commiss scheme can often be detect with the follow techniqu
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi linear correl
prepar a compar analysi of commiss earn by salesperson verifi rate and
calcul accuraci inordin high earn by an individu could signal fraud
analyz sale by salesperson for uncollect sale amount
determin proper segreg of duti in calcul of commiss amount
commiss should be independ provid by personnel outsid the sale
depart
contact a random sampl of custom to confirm sale
trend analysi on writtenoff account receiv
stratifi the writtenoff account receiv data and examin it for possibl trend and
pattern for exampl do ani of the follow trend appear
same salesperson
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1568 2011 fraud examin manual
same account period unless onli an annual review of account receiv is
perform
same collector
collect rate by agenc or collector
ani of these trend might indic fictiti account receiv or that onli new or good
account ar be assign to collector or collect agenc
analysi of deduct from payrol check
an analysi of the payrol withhold mai reveal either ghost employe or trust account
abus ghost employe will often have no withhold tax insur or other normal
deduct therefor a list of ani employe without these item mai reveal a ghost
employe
an analysi of withholdingtax deposit mai reveal that trust account tax have been
borrow even for a short period befor the tax ar deposit compar the
disburs date with the deposit date should reveal if the trust account tax have been
borrow addition ani delinqu payrol tax notic from the tax author should
serv as a red flag to potenti trust account tax borrow
other detect method
other method for detect ghost employe includ
review compani email address directori to ensur that all employe receiv
paycheck have a compani email address issu by the it depart
compar employe name address and social secur number as well as direct
deposit bank account number to determin if there ar ani unexpect duplic
compar employe payrol record to human resourc employe file to ensur social
secur number and name match
examin payrol check for dual endors
prevent of payrol scheme
there ar two basic prevent measur for payrollrel fraud segreg of duti and
period payrol review and analysi
segreg of duti
the follow duti should be segreg
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1569
payrol prepar
payrol disburs into payrol and withhold tax account
payrol distribut
payrol bank reconcili
human resourc department function
if payrol is prepar by personnel not respons for it distribut and reconcili it
will be difficult for anyon to successfulli add ghost employe thei will also be prevent
from borrow the trust account tax becaus thei will not have access to the disburs
function in smaller compani thi function is often handl outsid the firm at penni
per employe
after the payrol check ar prepar the transfer of fund from the gener account to the
payrol account should be handl by account the personnel depart should
distribut check and requir identif in exchang for the payrol check thi will
curtail the opportun to add ghost employe to the payrol a suggest form of
identif might be companyissu access pass if avail
if the bank reconcili function for the payrol account is assign to someon other than
those in the abov describ function then all the payrol function have been segreg
no on is abl to add ghost employe or borrow the withhold tax without the
opportun for discoveri by someon els
period review and analysi of payrol
period an independ review of the payrol might reveal that intern control ar not
work as design compar deposit date with date of payrol disburs or transfer
mai reveal ghost employe an occasion independ payrol distribut mai reveal
ghost employe
the exist of the follow mai indic the presenc of ghost employe
more than on employe with the same address
more than on employe with the same govern identif number
more than on employe with the same account number automat deposit
employe with no withhold
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1570 2011 fraud examin manual
indic of payrol fraud
in addit the follow audit program will help spot red flag to payrol distribut fraud
and help with instal control procedur
ar personnel record maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
is the payrol account function independ of the gener ledger function
ar chang to payrol not made unless the personnel depart send approv
notif directli to the payrol depart
ar refer and background check for new hire
ar all wage rate author in write by a design offici
ar sign author on file for employe whose wage ar subject to special
deduct
ar bonus commiss and overtim approv in advanc and review for
complianc with compani polici
ar sick leav vacat and holidai review for complianc with compani polici
ar appropri form complet and sign by employe to show author for
payrol deduct and withhold exempt
is the payrol period check against the personnel record for termin
employe fictiti employe etc
is a time clock us for offic employe as well as factori worker
if a time clock is us ar timecard 1 punch by employe in the presenc of a
design supervisor and 2 sign by a supervisor at the end of the payrol period
ar timecard and product report review and compar with payrol distribut
report and product schedul
ar payrol regist review and approv befor disburs ar made for 1
name of employe 2 hour work 3 wage rate 4 deduct 5 agreement with
payrol check and 6 unusu item
ar all employe paid by check out of a separ bank payrol account
ar payrol check prenumb and issu in numer sequenc
is access restrict to unissu payrol check and signatur plate
ar check drawn and sign by design offici who do not 1 prepar payrol 2
have access to the account record or 3 have custodi of cash fund
ar payrol check distribut by someon other than the depart head or the person
who prepar the payrol
is the distribut of the payrol rotat period to differ employe without
prior notic
is the payrol bank account reconcil by a design employe who 1 is not involv
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1571
in the prepar of payrol 2 doe not sign the check or 3 doe not handl the check
distribut
do payrol bank account reconcili procedur includ compar the paid check to
the payrol and scrutin cancel check endors
ar the payrol regist reconcil to the gener ledger control account
is a liabil account set up for all wage that have remain unclaim for a certain
period of time if ye 1 have these wage been redeposit in a special bank account
and 2 is identif requir to be present at the time of their subsequ
distribut
ar distribut of hour direct and indirect to activ or depart review and
approv by supervisori personnel
ar actual payrol amount review and compar to budget amount and ar
varianc analyz regularli
do adequ procedur exist for time and accur prepar and file of payrol
tax return and relat tax
ar employe benefit plan contribut reconcil to appropri employe
censu data
ar adequ detail record maintain of the entiti liabil for vacat pai and
sick pai ar thei reconcil to the gener ledger control account period
expens reimburs scheme
employe can manipul an organ expens reimburs procedur to gener
fraudul disburs expens reimburs ar usual paid by the compani in the
follow manner an employe submit a report detail an expens incur for a
busi purpos such as a busi lunch with a client airfar hotel bill associ with
busi travel and so forth in prepar an expens report an employe is usual requir
to explain the busi purpos for the expens as well as the time date and locat in
which it wa incur support document for the expens typic a receipt should be
attach to the report in some case cancel check written by the employe or copi of a
person credit card statement show the expens ar allow in lieu of receipt the
report must usual be author by a supervisor in order for the expens to be reimburs
the four most common type of expens reimburs scheme ar mischaracter
expens overst expens fictiti expens and multipl reimburs
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1572 2011 fraud examin manual
mischaracter expens reimburs
most compani onli reimburs certain expens of their employe which expens a
compani will pai for depend to an extent upon polici but in gener businessrel
travel lodg and meal ar reimburs on of the most basic expens reimburs
scheme is perpetr by simpli request reimburs for a person expens by
claim that the expens is businessrel see mischaracter expens flowchart
exampl of mischaracter expens includ claim person travel as a busi trip
list dinner with a friend as busi develop and so on employe submit the
receipt from their person expens along with their expens report but concoct busi
reason for the incur cost the fals expens report induc the victim organ to
issu a check reimburs the perpetr for hi person expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1573
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1574 2011 fraud examin manual
in case involv airfar and overnight travel a mischaracter can sometim be
detect by simpli compar the employe expens report to hi work schedul often
the date of the socal busi trip coincid with a vacat or dai off detail
expens report allow a compani to make thi kind of comparison and ar therefor veri
help in prevent expens scheme
a common element to mischaracter expens scheme is the failur to submit detail
expens report or ani expens report at all some compani allow employe to simpli
turn in receipt without explain the busi purpos of the expens reflect in the
receipt thi make it exceedingli easi for an employe to turn in for exampl a receipt
from a restaur and receiv a check to reimburs him for a busi dinner other
compani provid employe with compani credit card andor procur card and
allow employe to spend compani fund without provid detail inform justifi
the purchas and sometim not even requir receipt requir detail inform
mean more than just support document it should mean precis statement of what wa
purchas as well as when where and for whom the purchas wa made
exampl
a fraudster submit credit ca rd statement as support for expens but he onli submit
the top portion of the statement not the port ion that describ what wa purchas over
95 percent of hi expens that were reimbur sed were of a person rather than a busi
natur
even when detail expens report ar requir it mai be difficult to detect a
mischaracter expens reimburs scheme for exampl suppos a travel salesman
goe on a trip and run up a larg bar bill on night in hi hotel save hi receipt and list
thi expens as busi entertain on an expens report noth about the time
date or natur of the expens would readili point to fraud and the receipt would appear to
substanti the expens short of contact the client who wa allegedli entertain there
mai be littl a victim organ can do to identifi the expens as fraudul
overst expens reimburs
instead of seek reimburs for person expens some employe overst the cost
of actual busi expens see overst expens flowchart thi can be
accomplish in a number of wai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1575
overst expens
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1576 2011 fraud examin manual
alter receipt
the most fundament exampl of an overst expens reimburs scheme occur
when an employe doctor a receipt or other support document to reflect a higher
cost than what he actual paid the employe mai us whiteout a ballpoint pen or some
other method to chang the price reflect on the receipt befor submit hi expens
report if the compani doe not requir origin document as support the perpetr
gener attach a copi of the receipt to hi expens report alter ar usual less
notic on a photocopi than on an origin document for precis thi reason
busi should requir origin receipt and ink signatur on expens report
as with other expens fraud overst expens reimburs scheme often succe
becaus of poor control in compani where support document ar not requir for
exampl fraudster simpli lie about how much thei paid for a busi expens with no
support avail it mai be veri difficult to disprov an employe fals expens claim
overpurchas
anoth wai to overst a reimburs form is the overpurchas of busi
expens thi method is typic us by employe seek reimburs for travel
expens assum an employe is schedul to make a busi trip to anoth citi the
employe purchas an airlin ticket far in advanc of the trip when rate ar low when it is
close to the dai of the trip the employe purchas anoth ticket to the same destin
thi ticket will be more expens than the first on to further jack up the price the second
ticket might includ sever stop and layov on a veri circuit rout the employe
remov the passeng receipt coupon from the second ticket then return it for a full
refund he actual fli on the first less expens ticket he purchas but attach the
receipt from the more expens ticket to hi expens report
overst anoth employe expens
overst expens reimburs scheme ar not onli commit by the person who
actual incur the expens sometim thei mai be commit by a cowork who handl
or process expens report
exampl
a petti cashier white out other employe request for travel advanc and insert larger
amount the cashier then pass on the legitim travel advanc and pocket the excess
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1577
thi kind of scheme is most like to occur in a system where expens ar reimburs in
currenc rather than by a check sinc the perpetr would be unabl to extract hi cut
from a singl check made out to anoth employe
order to overst expens
final some employe knowingli falsifi their own report but do so at the direct of
their supervisor the employe mai be threaten with loss of their job if thei do not go
along with the scheme sometim the supervisor split the proce of the fraud with hi
subordin in other case the excess monei goe into a slush fund or is us for some
other busi purpos that is not in the compani budget the supervisor who engag in
these scheme often believ thei ar realli act in the best interest of their compani
exampl
a sale execut instruct hi salesmen to inflat their expens in order to gener cash
for a slush fund thi fund wa us to pai bribe and to provid improp form of
entertain for client and custom
fictiti expens reimburs
employe sometim seek reimburs for wholli fictiti expens instead of
overst a real busi expens or seek reimburs for a person expens an
employe just invent an expens and request that it be reimburs see fictiti
expens flowchart
produc fictiti receipt
on wai to gener a reimburs for a fictiti expens is to creat bogu support
document such as fals receipt the emerg of person comput ha enabl some
employe to creat realisticlook counterfeit receipt at home these counterfeit ar
often veri sophist even includ the logo of the store where good or servic were
allegedli purchas comput ar not the onli mean of creat support for a fictiti
expens some employe us calcul tape other cut and past old receipt from
supplier and some even us profession printer to gener fictiti receipt
unfortun not all compani requir receipt to be attach to expens report check
written by the employe or copi of hi person credit card bill might be allow as
support in lieu of a receipt some employe write person check that appear to be for
busi expens then photocopi these check and attach them to reimburs request
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1578 2011 fraud examin manual
in actual noth is purchas with the check thei ar destroi after the copi ar
made the perpetr end up receiv a reimburs from hi employ without ever
actual incur a busi expens the same method can be us with credit card where
a copi of a statement is us to support a purchas onc the expens report is file the
perpetr return the item and receiv a credit to hi account
obtain blank receipt from vendor
if the perpetr doe not creat receipt thei can be obtain from legitim supplier in
a number of wai some employe request blank receipt from waiter bartend taxi cab
driver etc these person fill in the blank receipt to creat busi expens a
fraudster might also have a friend spous rel etc who can provid receipt for
busi expens that never realli occur
exampl
an employe girlfriend work at a restaur near the victim organ thi
girlfriend valid credit card receipt and gave them to the fraudster so that he could
submit them with hi expens report
in some case a fraudster will steal an entir stack of blank receipt from a hotel restaur
etc then fill them in and over time us them to verifi fictiti busi expens
claim the expens of other
anoth wai perpetr us actual receipt to gener unwarr reimburs is by
submit expens report for expens that were paid by other for instanc an employe
might save the receipt from a meal that wa paid for by anoth parti then request
reimburs for the meal himself
multipl reimburs
the least common of the expens reimburs scheme involv multipl
reimburs thi type of fraud involv the submiss of a singl expens more than
on time the most frequent exampl of a multipl reimburs scheme is the submiss
of sever type of support for the same expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1579
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1580 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an employe would us for exampl an airlin ticket stub and a travel agenc invoic on
separ expens report so that he could be reimburs twice for the cost of a singl flight
the fraudster would have hi divis presid author on report and have the vice
presid approv the other so that neither would see both report addition the
perpetr allow a time lag of about a month between the file of the two report so that
the duplic would be less notic
in case where a compani doe not requir origin document as support some employe
even us sever copi of the same support document to gener multipl reimburs
rather than file two expens report employe mai also charg an item to the compani
credit card save the receipt and attach it to an expens report as if thei paid for the item
themselv the victim organ therefor end up pai twice for the same expens
detect of expens reimburs scheme
detect expens reimburs fraud involv two basic method the first of these is a
review and analysi of expens account the second detect method is a detail review
of expens report
review and analysi of expens account
gener expens account review us on of two method histor comparison or
comparison with budget amount a histor comparison compar the balanc
expend thi period in relat to the balanc spent in prior similar period when
perform thi review consid chang to the market servic or other compani
oper
budget ar estim of the monei andor time necessari to complet the task thei ar
base on past experi with consider for current and futur busi condit
therefor when compar actual and budget expens determin inordin expens
or inaccur budget estim is import
detail review of expens report
overal the best detect method is a detail review of employe expens report thi
method requir that the fraud examin have at the time of the examin a calendar and
a copi of the employe schedul for the relev period the examin should be familiar
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1581
with the travel and entertain polici of the compani addition the follow two
step mai help to detect and deter employe expens abus
requir employe to submit their expens report for a detail review befor payment
is reimburs if an employe know that hi expens report will be thoroughli
review he will be less like to includ fraudul expens on the report
period audit travel and entertain account thi is particularli effect shortli
befor employe perform review
prevent of expens reimburs scheme
detail expens report submiss and review
detail expens report should requir the follow inform
receipt or other support document
explan of the expens includ specif busi purpos
time period expens occur
place of expenditur
amount
it is not enough to have the detail report submit if thei ar not review a polici
requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the appropri
detail will help deter employe from submit person expens for reimburs
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1601
