2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Register Disbursement Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Register Disbursement Schemes 
Fraudulent disbursements at the cash register are different from the other schemes that 
often take place at the register, such as skimming and cash larceny. When cash is stolen as 
part of a register disbursement scheme, the removal of the cash is recorded on the register 
tape. A false transaction is entered so it appears that the disbursement of money was 
legitimate.  
 
There are two basic register disbursements schemes: false refunds and false voids. While the 
schemes are largely similar, there are a few differences between the two that merit discussing 
them separately.  
 
False Refunds 
A refund is processed at the register when a customer returns an item of merchandise that 
was purchased from the store. The transaction that is entered on the register indicates the 
merchandise is being replaced in the store’s inventory and the purchase price is being 
returned to the customer. In other words, a refund shows cash being disbursed from the 
register to the customer. (See “False Refunds” flowchart.) 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.502                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.503 
Fictitious Refunds 
In a fictitious refund scheme, an employee processes a transaction as if a customer were 
returning merchandise, even though there is no actual return. Two things result from this 
fraudulent transaction. The first is that the employee takes cash from the register in the 
amount of the false return. For instance, if the employee processes a fictitious return for a 
$100 pair of shoes, he removes $100 from the register. The register tape will indicate that the 
shoes were returned, so the disbursement appears to be legitimate. The register tape balances 
with the amount of cash on hand because the fraudulent refund accounts for the cash that 
the employee stole.  
 
The second thing that happens in a fictitious refund scheme is that a debit is made to the 
inventory system showing that the merchandise has been returned to the inventory. Since 
the transaction is fictitious, no merchandise is actually returned. The result is that the 
company’s inventory is overstated.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager created $5,500 worth of false re turns, resulting in a large shortage in the 
company’s inventory. He was able to carry his scheme on for several months, however, 
because (1) inventory was not counted regularly, and (2) the perpetrator, a manager, was 
one of the people who performed inventory counts.  
 
Overstated Refunds 
Rather than create an entirely fictitious refund, some employees merely overstate the amount 
of a legitimate refund and steal the excess money. For example, if a customer returns $100 
worth of merchandise, the employee might ring up a $200 return. The employee gives the 
customer $100 in return for the merchandise, then pockets the remaining $100. This will 
result in shrinkage of $100 worth of inventory.  
 
Credit Card Refunds 
When purchases are made with a credit card rather than cash, refunds appear as credits to 
the customer’s credit card rather than as cash disbursements. Some dishonest employees 
process false refunds on credit card sales in lieu of processing a normal cash transaction. 
One benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetrator does not have to physically take 
cash from the register and carry it out of the store. By processing the refunds to a credit card 
account, a perpetrator reaps a financial gain and avoids the potential embarrassment of being 
caught red-handed taking cash.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.504                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In a typical credit card refund scheme, the perpetrator rings up a refund on a credit card sale, 
even though the merchandise is not actually being returned. The employee credits his own 
credit card number rather than the customer’s. The result is that the cost of the item is 
credited to the perpetrator’s credit card account.  
 
A more creative and wide-ranging application of the credit card refund scheme occurs when 
employees process refunds to the accounts of other people, and in return receive a portion 
of the refund as a kickback. Suppose a person is $100 short on the rent. That person goes to 
the retail store where his friend is a teller and has the teller process a credit of $150 to his 
account. The “customer” then goes to an ATM machine and withdraws $150 in cash. He 
pays $50 to the teller and keeps $100 for himself.  
 
Refund schemes are more difficult to perpetrate in many high-tech retail stores where the 
cash registers have anti-fraud controls that require the refund to be made to the original 
credit card used for the purchase or that only allow for refunds in the form of a store credit 
for the current value of the item purchased.    
 
False Voids 
Fictitious voids are similar to refund schemes in that they make fraudulent disbursements 
from the register appear to be legitimate. When a sale is voided on a register, a copy of the 
customer’s receipt is usually attached to a void slip, along with the signature or initials of a 
manager indicating that the transaction has been approved. (See “False Voids” flowchart.) In 
order to process a false void, then, the first thing the perpetrator needs is the customer’s 
copy of the sales receipt. Typically, when an employee sets about processing a fictitious void, 
he simply withholds the customer’s receipt at the time of the sale. In many cases customers 
do not notice that they are not given a receipt.  
 
With the customer’s copy of the receipt in hand, the culprit rings a voided sale. Whatever 
money the customer paid for the item is removed from the register as though it is being 
returned to a customer. The copy of the customer’s receipt is attached to the void slip to 
verify the authenticity of the transaction.  
 
Before the voided sale will be perceived as valid, a manager generally must approve the 
transaction. In many instances, the manager in question simply neglects to verify the 
authenticity of the voided sale. A number of managers will sign most anything presented to 
them and thus leave themselves vulnerable to voided sales schemes. It is not a coincidence 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.505 
that the perpetrators of these crimes present their void slips to managers who are 
lackadaisical about authorizing them. These kinds of managers are generally targeted by the 
fraudsters and are essential to the success of the schemes.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.506                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.507 
EXAMPLE 
An employee processed fraudulent voids, kept customer receipts, and presented them to her 
supervisors for review at the end of her shift, long after the alleged transactions had taken 
place. Her supervisors approved the voided sales and the accounts receivable department 
failed to notice the excessive number of voided sales processed by this employee.  
 
Obviously, not all managers give rubber-stamp approval to voided sales. Some employees 
must therefore take other routes to get their voided sales “approved.” In most of these cases 
the perpetrator simply forges his supervisor’s authorization on the fraudulent void slips. It is 
also possible that managers will conspire with register employees and approve false voids in 
return for a share of the proceeds from the scheme.  
 
Concealing Register Disbursement Schemes 
As has already been discussed, two things happen when a false refund or void is entered into 
the register. The first is that the employee committing the fraud removes cash from the 
register, and the second is that the item allegedly being returned is debited back into the 
perpetual inventory. Of course, there really is no merchandise being returned. This leads to 
inventory shrinkage, a situation in which there is less inventory actually on hand than the 
perpetual inventory records reflect. A certain amount of shrinkage is expected in any retail 
industry, but too much of it raises concerns of fraud. It is therefore in the perpetrator’s best 
interests to conceal the appearance of shrinkage on the books.  
 
Inventory is essentially accounted for by a two-step process. The first part of the process is 
the perpetual inventory, which is a running tabulation of how much inventory should be on 
hand. When a sale of merchandise is made, the perpetual inventory is credited to remove this 
merchandise from the records. The amount of merchandise that should be on hand is 
reduced. (Conversely, when merchandise is returned the perpetual inventory is debited.) 
Periodically, someone from the company takes a physical count of the inventory, going 
through the stockroom or warehouse and counting the amount of inventory that is actually on 
hand. The two figures are then compared to see if there is a discrepancy between the 
perpetual inventory (what should be on hand) and the physical inventory (what is on hand). 
 
In register disbursement schemes, shrinkage is often concealed by overstating inventory 
during the physical count, especially if taking inventory is one of the perpetrator’s duties. 
The perpetrator simply overstates the amount of inventory on hand so it matches the 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.508                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
perpetual inventory. For a more detailed analysis of methods used to conceal inventory 
shrinkage, please see the Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 
Small Disbursements 
Another way for employees to avoid detection in a refund scheme is to keep the sizes of the 
disbursements low. Many companies set limits below which management review of a refund 
is not required. Where this is the case, employees simply process copious numbers of 
refunds that are small enough that they do not have to be reviewed.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee created over 1,000 false refunds, all under the review limit of $15. He was 
eventually caught because he began processing refunds before store hours and another 
employee noticed that refunds were appearing on the system before the store opened. 
Nevertheless, before his scheme was detected the man made off with over $11,000 of his 
employer’s money.  
 
Destroying Records 
One final means of concealing a register scheme, as with many kinds of fraud, is to destroy 
all records of the transaction. Most concealment methods are concerned with keeping 
management from realizing that fraud has occurred. When an employee resorts to destroying 
records, however, he typically has conceded that management will discover his theft. The 
purpose of destroying records is usually to prevent management from determining who the 
thief is.  
 
Detection of Register Disbursement Schemes 
Fictitious Refunds or Voided Sales 
Fictitious refunds or voided sales can often be detected when closely examining the 
documentation submitted with the cash receipts.  
• One detection method is to evaluate the refunds or discounts given by each cashier or 
salesperson. This analysis may point out that a single employee or group of employees 
has a higher incidence of refunds or discounts than others. Further examination is then 
necessary to determine if the refunds are appropriate and properly documented. 
• Signs in the register area asking customers to ask for and examine their receipts employ 
the customer as part of the internal control system. This helps ensure that the cashier or 
salesperson is properly accounting for the sale and prevents employees from using 
customer receipts as support for false void or refunds. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.509 
• Random service calls to customers who have returned merchandise or voided sales can 
be used to verify the legitimacy of transactions.  
 
Review and Analysis of Decreases in Gross Sales and/or Increases in Returns and Allowances 
Analyzing the relationship between sales, cost of sales, and the returns and allowances can 
detect inappropriate refunds and discounts. If a large cash fraud is suspected, a thorough 
review of these accounts might enlighten the examiner as to the magnitude of the suspected 
fraud. An analysis of refunds and returns and allowances with the actual flow of inventory 
might reveal some fraud schemes. The refund should cause an entry to inventory, even if it is 
damaged inventory. Likewise, a return will cause a corresponding entry to an inventory 
account. There should be a linear relationship between sales and returns and allowances over 
a relevant range. Any change in this relationship might point to a fraud scheme unless there 
is another valid explanation such as a change in the manufacturing process, change in 
product line, or change in price. 
 
Register Scheme Red Flags 
• Inappropriate employee segregation of duties. For example, register counting and 
reconciling should not be done by the cashier. 
• Cashiers, rather than supervisors, have access to the control keys that are necessary for 
refunds and voids. 
• Register employee has authority to void own transactions. 
• Register refunds are not methodically reviewed. 
• Multiple cashiers operate from a single cash drawer without separate access codes. 
• Personal checks from cashier found in register. 
• Voided transactions are not properly documented or not approved by a supervisor. 
• Voided cash receipt forms (manual systems) or supporting documents for voided 
transactions (cash register systems) are not retained on file. 
• Missing or obviously altered register tapes. 
• Gaps in the sequence of transactions on register tape. 
• An inordinate number of refunds, voids, or no-sales on register tape. 
• Inventory totals appear forced. 
• Multiple refunds or voids for am ounts just under the review limit. 
 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.510                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Prevention of Register Disbursement Schemes 
• Review the segregation of duties of key employees who staff the register as well as the 
duties of their supervisors.  
• As cash is received it is important to ensure that the employees responsible for 
completing these important tasks are informed of their responsibilities and properly 
supervised.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have paid money on an account 
and have not received credit, or in some cases, who have been credited for an amount 
that does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and inquiries are also 
received frequently from banks. 
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• Quantity of refunds should be analyzed to detect multiple small refunds. 
• Communicate and adhere to company policy of performing unannounced cash counts. 
• Maintain the presence of a manager or supervisor near the area of the cash register as a 
deterrent to theft. 
• Review supporting documents for voided and refunded transactions for propriety (i.e., 
legitimacy and approvals). 
• Review the numerical sequence and completeness of cash register tapes. 
 
 



:


regist disburs scheme
fraudul disburs at the cash regist ar differ from the other scheme that
often take place at the regist such as skim and cash larceni when cash is stolen as
part of a regist disburs scheme the remov of the cash is record on the regist
tape a fals transact is enter so it appear that the disburs of monei wa
legitim
there ar two basic regist disburs scheme fals refund and fals void while the
scheme ar larg similar there ar a few differ between the two that merit discuss
them separ
fals refund
a refund is process at the regist when a custom return an item of merchandis that
wa purchas from the store the transact that is enter on the regist indic the
merchandis is be replac in the store inventori and the purchas price is be
return to the custom in other word a refund show cash be disburs from the
regist to the custom see fals refund flowchart
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1502 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1503
fictiti refund
in a fictiti refund scheme an employe process a transact as if a custom were
return merchandis even though there is no actual return two thing result from thi
fraudul transact the first is that the employe take cash from the regist in the
amount of the fals return for instanc if the employe process a fictiti return for a
100 pair of shoe he remov 100 from the regist the regist tape will indic that the
shoe were return so the disburs appear to be legitim the regist tape balanc
with the amount of cash on hand becaus the fraudul refund account for the cash that
the employe stole
the second thing that happen in a fictiti refund scheme is that a debit is made to the
inventori system show that the merchandis ha been return to the inventori sinc
the transact is fictiti no merchandis is actual return the result is that the
compani inventori is overst
exampl
a manag creat 5500 worth of fals re turn result in a larg shortag in the
compani inventori he wa abl to carri hi scheme on for sever month howev
becaus 1 inventori wa not count regularli and 2 the perpetr a manag wa
on of the peopl who perform inventori count
overst refund
rather than creat an entir fictiti refund some employe mere overst the amount
of a legitim refund and steal the excess monei for exampl if a custom return 100
worth of merchandis the employe might ring up a 200 return the employe give the
custom 100 in return for the merchandis then pocket the remain 100 thi will
result in shrinkag of 100 worth of inventori
credit card refund
when purchas ar made with a credit card rather than cash refund appear as credit to
the custom credit card rather than as cash disburs some dishonest employe
process fals refund on credit card sale in lieu of process a normal cash transact
on benefit of the credit card method is that the perpetr doe not have to physic take
cash from the regist and carri it out of the store by process the refund to a credit card
account a perpetr reap a financi gain and avoid the potenti embarrass of be
caught redhand take cash
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1504 2011 fraud examin manual
in a typic credit card refund scheme the perpetr ring up a refund on a credit card sale
even though the merchandis is not actual be return the employe credit hi own
credit card number rather than the custom the result is that the cost of the item is
credit to the perpetr credit card account
a more creativ and widerang applic of the credit card refund scheme occur when
employe process refund to the account of other peopl and in return receiv a portion
of the refund as a kickback suppos a person is 100 short on the rent that person goe to
the retail store where hi friend is a teller and ha the teller process a credit of 150 to hi
account the custom then goe to an atm machin and withdraw 150 in cash he
pai 50 to the teller and keep 100 for himself
refund scheme ar more difficult to perpetr in mani hightech retail store where the
cash regist have antifraud control that requir the refund to be made to the origin
credit card us for the purchas or that onli allow for refund in the form of a store credit
for the current valu of the item purchas
fals void
fictiti void ar similar to refund scheme in that thei make fraudul disburs
from the regist appear to be legitim when a sale is void on a regist a copi of the
custom receipt is usual attach to a void slip along with the signatur or initi of a
manag indic that the transact ha been approv see fals void flowchart in
order to process a fals void then the first thing the perpetr need is the custom
copi of the sale receipt typic when an employe set about process a fictiti void
he simpli withhold the custom receipt at the time of the sale in mani case custom
do not notic that thei ar not given a receipt
with the custom copi of the receipt in hand the culprit ring a void sale whatev
monei the custom paid for the item is remov from the regist as though it is be
return to a custom the copi of the custom receipt is attach to the void slip to
verifi the authent of the transact
befor the void sale will be perceiv as valid a manag gener must approv the
transact in mani instanc the manag in question simpli neglect to verifi the
authent of the void sale a number of manag will sign most anyth present to
them and thu leav themselv vulner to void sale scheme it is not a coincid
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1505
that the perpetr of these crime present their void slip to manag who ar
lackadais about author them these kind of manag ar gener target by the
fraudster and ar essenti to the success of the scheme
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1506 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1507
exampl
an employe process fraudul void kept custom receipt and present them to her
supervisor for review at the end of her shift long after the alleg transact had taken
place her supervisor approv the void sale and the account receiv depart
fail to notic the excess number of void sale process by thi employe
obvious not all manag give rubberstamp approv to void sale some employe
must therefor take other rout to get their void sale approv in most of these case
the perpetr simpli forg hi supervisor author on the fraudul void slip it is
also possibl that manag will conspir with regist employe and approv fals void in
return for a share of the proce from the scheme
conceal regist disburs scheme
as ha alreadi been discuss two thing happen when a fals refund or void is enter into
the regist the first is that the employe commit the fraud remov cash from the
regist and the second is that the item allegedli be return is debit back into the
perpetu inventori of cours there realli is no merchandis be return thi lead to
inventori shrinkag a situat in which there is less inventori actual on hand than the
perpetu inventori record reflect a certain amount of shrinkag is expect in ani retail
industri but too much of it rais concern of fraud it is therefor in the perpetr best
interest to conceal the appear of shrinkag on the book
inventori is essenti account for by a twostep process the first part of the process is
the perpetu inventori which is a run tabul of how much inventori should be on
hand when a sale of merchandis is made the perpetu inventori is credit to remov thi
merchandis from the record the amount of merchandis that should be on hand is
reduc convers when merchandis is return the perpetu inventori is debit
period someon from the compani take a physic count of the inventori go
through the stockroom or warehous and count the amount of inventori that is actual on
hand the two figur ar then compar to see if there is a discrep between the
perpetu inventori what should be on hand and the physic inventori what is on hand
in regist disburs scheme shrinkag is often conceal by overst inventori
dure the physic count especi if take inventori is on of the perpetr duti
the perpetr simpli overst the amount of inventori on hand so it match the
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1508 2011 fraud examin manual
perpetu inventori for a more detail analysi of method us to conceal inventori
shrinkag pleas see the inventori and other asset section
small disburs
anoth wai for employe to avoid detect in a refund scheme is to keep the size of the
disburs low mani compani set limit below which manag review of a refund
is not requir where thi is the case employe simpli process copiou number of
refund that ar small enough that thei do not have to be review
exampl
an employe creat over 1000 fals refund all under the review limit of 15 he wa
eventu caught becaus he began process refund befor store hour and anoth
employe notic that refund were appear on the system befor the store open
nevertheless befor hi scheme wa detect the man made off with over 11000 of hi
employ monei
destroi record
on final mean of conceal a regist scheme as with mani kind of fraud is to destroi
all record of the transact most conceal method ar concern with keep
manag from realiz that fraud ha occur when an employe resort to destroi
record howev he typic ha conced that manag will discov hi theft the
purpos of destroi record is usual to prevent manag from determin who the
thief is
detect of regist disburs scheme
fictiti refund or void sale
fictiti refund or void sale can often be detect when close examin the
document submit with the cash receipt
on detect method is to evalu the refund or discount given by each cashier or
salesperson thi analysi mai point out that a singl employe or group of employe
ha a higher incid of refund or discount than other further examin is then
necessari to determin if the refund ar appropri and properli document
sign in the regist area ask custom to ask for and examin their receipt emploi
the custom as part of the intern control system thi help ensur that the cashier or
salesperson is properli account for the sale and prevent employe from us
custom receipt as support for fals void or refund
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1509
random servic call to custom who have return merchandis or void sale can
be us to verifi the legitimaci of transact
review and analysi of decreas in gross sale andor increas in return and allow
analyz the relationship between sale cost of sale and the return and allow can
detect inappropri refund and discount if a larg cash fraud is suspect a thorough
review of these account might enlighten the examin as to the magnitud of the suspect
fraud an analysi of refund and return and allow with the actual flow of inventori
might reveal some fraud scheme the refund should caus an entri to inventori even if it is
damag inventori likewis a return will caus a correspond entri to an inventori
account there should be a linear relationship between sale and return and allow over
a relev rang ani chang in thi relationship might point to a fraud scheme unless there
is anoth valid explan such as a chang in the manufactur process chang in
product line or chang in price
regist scheme red flag
inappropri employe segreg of duti for exampl regist count and
reconcil should not be done by the cashier
cashier rather than supervisor have access to the control kei that ar necessari for
refund and void
regist employe ha author to void own transact
regist refund ar not method review
multipl cashier oper from a singl cash drawer without separ access code
person check from cashier found in regist
void transact ar not properli document or not approv by a supervisor
void cash receipt form manual system or support document for void
transact cash regist system ar not retain on file
miss or obvious alter regist tape
gap in the sequenc of transact on regist tape
an inordin number of refund void or nosal on regist tape
inventori total appear forc
multipl refund or void for am ount just under the review limit
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1510 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent of regist disburs scheme
review the segreg of duti of kei employe who staff the regist as well as the
duti of their supervisor
as cash is receiv it is import to ensur that the employe respons for
complet these import task ar inform of their respons and properli
supervis
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have paid monei on an account
and have not receiv credit or in some case who have been credit for an amount
that doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and inquiri ar also
receiv frequent from bank
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
quantiti of refund should be analyz to detect multipl small refund
commun and adher to compani polici of perform unannounc cash count
maintain the presenc of a manag or supervisor near the area of the cash regist as a
deterr to theft
review support document for void and refund transact for proprieti ie
legitimaci and approv
review the numer sequenc and complet of cash regist tape
