2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Check Tampering
Check tampering is unique among the fraudulent disbursement schemes because it is the one 
group in which the perpetrator physically prepares the fraudulent check. In most fraudulent 
disbursement schemes, the culprit generates a payment to himself by submitting some false 
document to the victim organization such as an invoice or a timecard. The false document 
represents a claim for payment and causes the victim organization to issue a check that the 
perpetrator can convert.  
 
Check tampering schemes are fundamentally different. In these schemes the perpetrator 
takes physical control of a check and makes it payable to himself through one of several 
methods. Check tampering frauds depend upon factors such as access to the company 
checkbook, access to bank statements, and the ability to forge signatures or alter other 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.511 
information on the face of the check. Most check tampering crimes fall into one of four 
categories: forged maker schemes, forged endorsement schemes, altered payee schemes, and 
authorized maker schemes.  
 
Forged Maker Schemes    
The legal definition of forgery includes not only the signing of another person’s name to a 
document (such as a check) with a fraudulent intent, but also the fraudulent alteration of a 
genuine instrument. This definition is so broad that it would encompass all check tampering 
schemes. For the purposes of this text, the definition of forgery has been narrowed to fit the 
fraud examiner’s needs. In order to properly distinguish the various methods used by 
individuals to tamper with checks, the concept of “forgeries” will be limited to those cases in 
which an individual signs another person’s name on a check.  
 
The person who signs a check is known as the “maker” of the check. A forged maker 
scheme, then, may be defined as a check tampering scheme in which an employee 
misappropriates a check and fraudulently affixes the signature of an authorized maker 
thereon. (See “Forged Maker Schemes” flowchart.) Frauds that involve other types of check 
tampering, such as the alteration of the payee or the changing of the dollar amount, are 
classified separately.  
 
In order to forge a check, an employee must have access to a blank check, he must be able 
to produce a convincing forgery of an authorized signature, and he must be able to conceal 
his crime. Concealment is a universal problem in check tampering schemes; the methods 
used are basically the same whether one is dealing with a forged maker scheme, an 
intercepted check scheme, a concealed check scheme, or an authorized maker scheme. 
Therefore, concealment issues will be discussed as a group later in this section.  
 
Obtaining the Check 
EMPLOYEES WITH ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
One cannot forge a company check unless one first possesses a company check. Most 
forgery schemes are committed by accounts payable clerks, office managers, bookkeepers, or 
other employees whose duties typically include the preparation of company checks. These 
are people who have access to the company checkbook on a regular basis and are therefore 
in the best position to steal blank checks.  
                                                          
1 Henry Campbell Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, Fifth Edition  (St. Paul: West Publishing Co., 1979) p. 585.   
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.512                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EMPLOYEES LACKING ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
If the perpetrator does not have access to the company checkbook through his work duties, 
he will have to find other means of misappropriating a check. The way a person steals a 
check depends largely on how the checkbook is handled within a particular company. In 
some circumstances the checkbook is poorly guarded, left in unattended areas where anyone 
can get to it. In other companies where blank checks are kept in a restricted area, the 
perpetrator might have surreptitiously obtained a key or combination to this area. An 
accomplice might provide blank checks for the perpetrator in return for a portion of the 
stolen funds. Perhaps a secretary sees the checkbook left on a manager’s desk or a custodian 
comes across blank checks in an unlocked desk drawer.  
 
In some companies, checks are computer generated. When this is the case, an employee who 
knows the password for preparing and issuing checks can usually obtain as many unsigned 
checks as he desires. There are an unlimited number of ways to steal a check, each 
dependent on the way in which a particular company guards its blank checks. In some 
instances, employees go so far as to produce counterfeit checks.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee had an accomplice who worked for a check-printing company. The accomplice 
was able to print blank checks with the account number of the perpetrator’s company. The 
perpetrator then wrote over $100,000 worth of forgeries on these counterfeit checks.  
 
To Whom Is the Check Made Payable?  
TO THE PERPETRATOR 
Once a blank check has been obtained, the perpetrator must decide to whom it should be 
made payable. In most instances forged checks are made payable to the perpetrator himself 
so that they can be easily converted. Canceled checks that are payable to an employee should 
be closely scrutinized for the possibility of fraud.  
 
If the perpetrator owns his own business or has established a shell company, he will usually 
write fraudulent checks to these entities rather than himself. These checks are not as 
obviously fraudulent on their faces as checks made payable to an employee. At the same 
time, these checks are easy to convert because the perpetrator owns the entity to which the 
checks are payable.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.513 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.514                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
TO AN ACCOMPLICE  
If a fraudster is working with an accomplice, he can make the forged check payable to that 
person. The accomplice then cashes the check and splits the money with the employee-fraudster. 
Because the check is payable to the accomplice in his true identity, it is easily 
converted. An additional benefit to using an accomplice is that a canceled check payable to a 
third-party accomplice is not as likely to raise suspicion as a canceled check to an employee. 
The obvious drawback to using an accomplice in a scheme is that the employee-fraudster 
usually has to share the proceeds of the scheme. 
 
TO “CASH”   
The perpetrator may also write checks payable to “cash” in order to avoid listing himself as 
the payee. Checks made payable to cash, however, must still be endorsed. The perpetrator 
will have to sign his own name or forge the name of another in order to convert the check. 
Checks payable to “cash” are usually viewed more  skeptically than checks payable to persons 
or businesses. Some institutions may refuse to cash checks made payable to “cash.”  
 
TO VENDORS 
Not all fraudsters forge company checks to obtain cash. Some employees use forged maker 
schemes to purchase goods or services for their own benefit. These fraudulent checks are 
made payable to third-party vendors who are uninvolved in the fraud. For instance, an 
employee might forge a company check to buy a computer for his home. The computer 
vendor is not involved in the fraud at all. Furthermore, if the victim organization regularly 
does business with this vendor, the person who reconciles the company’s accounts may 
assume that the check was used for a legitimate business expense.  
 
Forging the Signature 
After the employee has obtained and prepared a blank check, he must forge an authorized 
signature in order to convert the check. The most obvious method, and the one that comes 
to mind when one thinks of the word “forgery,” is to simply take pen in hand and sign the 
name of an authorized maker.  
 
FREE-HAND FORGERY 
The difficulty a fraudster encounters when physically signing the authorized maker’s name is 
in creating a reasonable approximation of the true signature. If the forgery appears authentic, 
the perpetrator will probably have no problem cashing the check. In truth, the forged 
signature may not have to be particularly accurate. Many fraudsters cash forged checks at 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.515 
liquor stores, grocery stores, or other institutions that are known to be less than diligent in 
verifying signatures and identification. Nevertheless, a poorly forged signature is a clear red 
flag of fraud. The maker’s signature on can celed checks should be reviewed for forgeries 
during the reconciliation process.  
 
PHOTOCOPIED FORGERIES 
To guarantee an accurate forgery, some employees make photocopies of legitimate 
signatures. The signature of an authorized signer is copied from some document (such as a 
business letter) onto a transparency, then the transparency is laid over a blank check so that 
the signature copies onto the maker line of the check. The result is a check with a perfect 
signature of an authorized maker.  
 
AUTOMATIC CHECK-SIGNING INSTRUMENTS 
Companies that issue a large number of checks sometimes utilize automatic check-signing 
instruments. Automated signatures are either produced with manual instruments like 
signature stamps or they are printed by computer. Obviously, an employee who has access to 
an automatic check-signing instrument will have no trouble forging the signatures of 
authorized makers. Even the most rudimentary control procedures should severely limit 
access to these instruments.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A fiscal officer maintained a set of manual checks that were unknown to other persons in 
the company. The company used an automated check signer and the custodian of the signer 
let the officer have uncontrolled access to it. Using the manual checks and the company’s 
check signer, the fiscal officer was able to write over $90,000 worth of fraudulent checks to 
himself over a period of approximately four years.  
 
The same principle applies to computer-generated signatures. Access to the password or 
program that prints signed checks should be restricted, specifically excluding those who 
prepare checks and those who reconcile the bank statement.  
 
Converting the Check 
In order to convert the forged check, the perpetrator must endorse it. The endorsement is 
typically made in the name of the payee on the check. Since identification is typically 
required when one seeks to convert a check, the perpetrator usually needs fake identification 
if he forges checks to real or fictitious third persons. As discussed earlier, checks payable to 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.516                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“cash” require the endorsement of the person converting them. Without a fake ID the 
perpetrator will likely have to endorse these checks in his own name. An employee’s 
endorsement on a canceled check is obviously a red flag.  
 
Forged Endorsement Schemes 
Forged endorsements are those check tampering schemes in which an employee intercepts a 
company check intended to pay a third party and converts the check by endorsing it in the 
third-party’s name. In some cases the employee also signs his own name as a second 
endorser. (See “Forged Endorsement Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
A fraudster’s main dilemma in a forged endorsement scheme (and in all intercepted check 
schemes, for that matter) is gaining access to a check after it has been signed. The fraudster 
must either steal the check between the point where it is signed and the point where it is 
delivered, or he must re-route the check, causing it to be delivered to a location where he can 
retrieve it. The manner used to steal a check depends largely upon the way the company 
handles outgoing disbursements. Anyone who is allowed to handle signed checks may be in 
a good position to intercept them.  
 
Intercepting Checks Before Delivery 
EMPLOYEES INVOLVED IN DELIVERY OF CHECKS 
Obviously, the employees in the best position to intercept signed checks are those whose 
duties include the handling and delivery of signed checks. The most obvious example is a 
mailroom employee who opens outgoing mail containing signed checks and steals the 
checks. Other personnel with access to outgoing checks might include accounts payable 
employees, payroll clerks, and secretaries. 
 
POOR CONTROL OF SIGNED CHECKS 
Unfortunately, employees are often able to intercept signed checks because of poor internal 
controls. For instance, many employees simply find signed checks left unattended in the 
work areas of the persons who signed them or the persons charged with their delivery. In 
these cases it is easy for the perpetrator to steal the check. Another common breakdown 
occurs when the person who prepares a check is also involved in the delivery of that check 
once it has been signed.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.517 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.518                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A high-level manager with authority to disburse employee benefits instructed accounts 
payable personnel to return signed benefits checks to him instead of immediately delivering 
them to their intended recipients. These instructions were not questioned due to the 
manager’s level of authority within the company. The perpetrator simply took the checks 
that were returned to him and deposited them  into his personal bank account, forging the 
endorsements of the intended payees.  
 
In addition to the preceding example, secretaries or clerks who prepare checks for their 
bosses to sign are often responsible for mailing those checks. It is very simple for those 
employees to make out a fraudulent check and obtain a signature, knowing that the boss will 
give the signed check right back to them. This scheme is indicative of the key problem with 
occupational fraud: trust. In order for an office to run efficiently, high-level employees must 
be able to rely on their subordinates. Yet this reliance is precisely what puts subordinates in a 
position to defraud their employer.  
 
Theft of Returned Checks 
Checks that have been mailed and are later returned to the victim for some reason, such as 
an incorrect address, are often targeted for theft by fraudsters. Employees with access to 
incoming mail are able to intercept these returned checks and convert them by forging the 
endorsement of the intended payee.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager took and converted approximately $130,000 worth of checks that were 
returned due to noncurrent addresses (he also stole outgoing checks, cashed them, and then 
declared them lost). The fraudster was well known at his bank and was able to convert the 
checks by claiming that he was doing it as a favor to the real payees, who were “too busy to 
come to the bank.” The fraudster was able to continue with his scheme because the nature 
of his company’s business was such that the recipients of the misdelivered checks were often 
not aware that the victim company owed them  money. Therefore, they did not complain 
when their checks failed to arrive. In addition, the perpetrator had complete control over the 
bank reconciliation, so he could issue new checks to those payees who did complain, then 
“force” the reconciliation, making it appear that the bank balance and book balance 
matched when, in fact, they did not.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.519 
Re-Routing the Delivery of Checks 
Employees may also misappropriate signed checks by altering the addresses to which those 
checks are mailed. These perpetrators usually replace the legitimate address of the payee with 
an address where the employee can retrieve the check, such as the employee’s home or a 
P.O. box the employee controls. In other instances, the perpetrator might purposely 
misaddress a check so that it will be returned as undeliverable. The employee steals the check 
after it is returned to the victim organization.  
 
Obviously, proper separation of duties should  preclude anyone who prepares disbursements 
from being involved in their delivery. Nevertheless, the person who prepares a check is often 
allowed to address and mail it as well. In some instances where proper controls are in place, 
employees are still able to cause the misdelivery of checks. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk in the customer service department of a mortgage company was in charge of 
changing the mailing addresses of property ow ners. She was assigned a password that gave 
her access to make these changes. The clerk was transferred to a new department where one 
of her duties was the issuance of checks to property owners. Unfortunately, her supervisor 
forgot to cancel her old password. When the clerk realized this oversight, she would request 
a check for a certain property owner, then sign onto the system with her old password and 
change the address of that property owner. The check would be sent to her. The next day 
the employee would use her old password to re-enter the system and replace the proper 
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent. This fraudster’s 
scheme resulted in a loss of over $250,000 to the victim company.  
 
Converting the Stolen Check 
Once a check has been intercepted, the perpetrator can cash it by forging the payee’s 
signature, hence the term forged endorsement scheme. Depending on where he tries to cash the 
check, the perpetrator may or may not need fake identification at this stage. If a perpetrator 
is required to produce identification in order to cash his stolen check, and if he does not 
have a fake ID in the payee’s name, he may use a dual endorsement to cash or deposit the 
check. In other words, the perpetrator forges the payee’s signature as though the payee had 
transferred the check to him, then the perpetrator endorses the check in his own name and 
converts it. When the bank statement is reconciled, dual endorsements on checks should 
always raise suspicions, particularly when the second signer is an employee of the company. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.520                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Altered Payee Schemes 
The second type of intercepted check scheme is the altered payee scheme. This is a form of 
check tampering in which an employee intercepts a company check intended for a third 
party and alters the payee designation so that the check can be converted by the employee or 
an accomplice. (See “Altered Payee Schemes” flowchart.) The employee inserts his own 
name, the name of an accomplice, or the name of a fictitious entity on the payee line of the 
check. The alteration essentially makes the check payable to the employee (or an 
accomplice), so there is no need to forge an endorsement and no need to obtain false 
identification.  
 
Altering Checks Prepared by Others: Inserting a New Payee 
The method used to alter the payee designation on a check depends largely on how that 
check is prepared and intercepted. (Incidentally, the amount  of the check may also be altered 
at the same time and by the same method as the payee designation.) Checks prepared by 
others can be intercepted by any of the methods discussed in the forged endorsements 
section above. When the perpetrator intercepts a check that has been prepared by someone 
else, there are basically two methods that may be employed to change the payee. The first is 
to insert the false payee’s name in place of  the true payee’s. The true name might be 
scratched out with a pen or covered up with white-out. Another name is then entered on the 
payee designation line. These kinds of alterations are usually simple to detect.  
 
A more sophisticated method occurs when the perpetrator of the fraud enters the accounts 
payable system and changes the names of payees before checks are generated. This can be 
accomplished by anyone with a password that permits access to the accounts payable  
address file.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable employee was so trusted that her manager allowed her to use his 
computer password in his absence. The password permitted access to the accounts payable 
address file. This employee waited until the manager was absent, then selected a legitimate 
vendor with whom her company did a lot of business. She held up the vendor’s invoices for 
the day, and after work used the manager’s log-in code to change the vendor name and 
address to that of a fictitious company. The new name and address were run through the 
accounts payable cycle with an old invoice number, causing a fraudulent check to be issued. 
The victim company had an automated duplicate invoice test, but the perpetrator 
circumvented it substituting “1” for “I” and “0” (zero) for capital “O.” The next day, 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.521 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.522                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 the employee would replace the true vendor’s name and address, and mutilate the check 
register so that the check payable to the fi ctitious vendor was concealed. Approximately 
$300,000 in false checks was issued using this method.  
 
Altering Checks Prepared by Others: “Tacking On” 
The other method that can be used by perpetrators to alter checks prepared by others is 
“tacking on” additional letters or words to the end of the real payee designation. For 
instance, checks payable to “ABC” company might be altered to read “A.B. Collins.” The 
employee then cashes the checks in the name of A.B. Collins. It sounds like an odd scheme, 
but it really happens. In these cases, the simple inclusion of a filler line after the payee 
designation would prevent the loss.  
 
In addition to altering the payee designation, the amount of the check can be altered by 
tacking on extra numbers if the person preparing the check is careless and leaves space for 
extra numbers in the “Amount” portion of the check. 
 
Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Erasable Ink 
When the perpetrator prepares the check that is to be altered, the schemes tend to be a bit 
more sophisticated. The reason for this is obvious:  If the perpetrator is able to prepare the 
check himself, he can prepare it with the thought of how the payee designation will be 
changed. One of the most common ways to prepare a check for alteration is to write or type 
the payee’s name (and possibly the amount) in erasable ink. After an authorized maker signs 
the check, the perpetrator retrieves the check, erases the payee’s name, and inserts his own. 
In some cases, employees even obtain signatures on checks written in pencil. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A bookkeeper typed out small checks to a local supplier and had the owner of the company 
sign them. The bookkeeper then used her erasing typewriter to lift the payee designation and 
amount from the check. She entered her own name as the payee and raised the amount 
precipitously. For instance, the owner might si gn a $10 check that later became a $10,000 
check. These checks were entered in the disbursements journal as payments for aggregate 
inventory to the company’s largest supplier, who received several large checks each month. 
The bookkeeper stole over $300,000 fr om her employer in this scheme.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.523 
Where a proper separation of duties is in place, a person who prepares a check should not be 
permitted to handle the check after it has been signed. Nevertheless, this is exactly what 
happens in most altered payee schemes. The person who prepares the check knows that the 
maker of the check will return it to him after it has been signed. 
 
Altering Checks Prepared by the Fraudster: Blank Checks 
The most egregious example of poor controls in the handling of signed checks is one in 
which the perpetrator prepares a check, leaves the payee designation blank, and submits it to an 
authorized maker who signs the check and returns it to the employee. Obviously, this makes 
it quite easy for the perpetrator to designate himself or an accomplice as the payee. Common 
sense should prevent anyone from giving a signed, blank check to another person. 
Nevertheless, this is a fairly common occurrence, especially when the perpetrator is a trusted 
long-time employee.  
 
Converting Altered Checks 
As with all other types of fraudulent checks, conversion is accomplished by endorsing the 
checks in the name of the payee. Conversion of fraudulent checks has already been discussed 
in previous sections and will not be re-examined here.  
 
Authorized Maker Schemes  
The final check tampering scheme, the authorized maker scheme, may be the most difficult 
to defend against. An authorized maker scheme occurs when an employee with signature 
authority on a company account writes fraudulent checks for his own benefit and signs his 
own name as the maker. (See “Authorized Maker Schemes” flowchart.) The perpetrator in 
these schemes can write and sign fraudulent checks himself. He does not have to alter a pre-
 prepared instrument or forge the maker’s signature.  
 
Overriding Controls Through Intimidation 
When a person is authorized to sign company checks, preparing the checks is easy. The 
employee simply writes and signs the instruments the same way he would with any legitimate 
check. In most situations, check signers are owners, officers, or otherwise high-ranking 
employees, and thus have or can obtain access to all the blank checks they need. Even if 
company policy prohibits check signers from handling blank checks, the perpetrator can 
normally use his influence to overcome this impediment. What employee is going to tell the 
CEO that he can’t have a blank check?   
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.524                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The most basic way an employee accomplishes an authorized maker scheme is to override 
controls designed to prevent fraud. Most authorized signatories have high levels of influence 
within their companies. The perpetrators use this influence to deflect questions about 
fraudulent transactions.  
 
A common authorized maker scheme is one in which a majority owner or sole shareholder 
uses his company as a sort of alter ego, paying personal expenses directly out of company 
accounts. Instead of paying personal expenses, the perpetrator might cut checks directly to 
himself, his friends, or family. Using fear of job security as a weapon, the owner can 
maintain a work environment in which employees are afraid to question these transactions.  
 
High-level managers or officers might also use their authority to override controls in 
companies with absent or inattentive ownership. Intimidation can play a large part in the 
commission and concealment of types of occupational fraud involving powerful individuals.  
 
EXAMPLE 
The manager of a sales office stole approximately $150,000 from his employers over a two-
 year period. This manager had primary check-signing authority and abused this power by 
writing company checks to pay his personal expenses. The manager’s fraudulent activities 
were well known by certain members of his staff, but these employees’ careers were controlled 
by the perpetrator. Fear of losing their jobs combined with lack of a proper whistleblowing 
structure prevented the manager’s employees from reporting his fraud.  
 
Poor Controls 
Although overriding controls is the most blatant way to execute an authorized maker 
scheme, it is not the most common. Far more of these schemes occur because no one is 
paying attention to the accounts and few controls are present to prevent fraud. Some 
employees who write checks to themselves or to purchase items for themselves simply code 
the checks to expense accounts that they know are not likely to be reviewed.  
 
The failure to closely monitor accounts is supplemented by lack of internal controls, 
specifically the absence of separation of duties in the cash disbursements process. 
Employees who commit authorized maker fraud are often in charge of reconciling the bank 
accounts of the business. This is especially common in small businesses. Employees with 
total control over the disbursements process are in a perfect position to write fraudulent 
checks for their own benefit.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.525 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.526                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
The bookkeeper of a medium-sized company was charged with paying all bills and 
preparing the company payroll. She had access to an automatic check signer and total 
control over company bank accounts. The bookkeeper wrote extra checks to herself, coded 
the expenditures to payroll, and destroyed the ca nceled checks when they were returned with 
the bank statement.  
 
Concealing Check Tampering Schemes  
Most check tampering schemes do not consist of a single occurrence but instead continue 
over a period of time. Therefore, concealing the fraud is arguably the most important aspect 
of the scheme. If an employee intended to steal a large sum of money and escape to South 
America, hiding the fraud might not be so important. But the vast majority of occupational 
fraudsters remain employees of their companies as they continue to steal from them, which 
makes concealment the key to the crime.  
 
Concealment of the fraud means not only hiding the identity of the criminal, but in most 
cases hiding the fact that a fraud has even occurred. The most successful frauds are those in 
which the victim organization is unaware that it is being robbed. Obviously, once a business 
learns that it is being victimized it will take steps to staunch its bleeding and the end of the 
scheme will be at hand.  
 
Check tampering schemes can present especially tricky concealment problems for dishonest 
employees. In other types of fraudulent disbursements such as invoice or payroll schemes, 
the fraudulent payment is entered in the books as a legitimate transaction by someone other 
than the perpetrator. The payments in those schemes are generated by the production of 
false documents that cause accounts payable personnel to think that money is owed to a 
particular person or vendor. When accounts payable issues a disbursement for a bogus 
invoice, it does so because it believes the invoice to be genuine. The payment is then entered 
in the books as a legitimate payment. In other words, the perpetrator generally does not have 
to worry about concealing the payment in the books, because someone else unwittingly does 
it for him. But in forgery and authorized maker schemes the perpetrator is the one writing 
the check, and he is usually the one coding the check in the disbursements journal. He must 
“explain” the check on the books.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.527 
Forged endorsement schemes and altered payee schemes are different because they involve 
the alteration of checks that were already prepared and coded by someone else. 
Nevertheless, they create a problem for the perpetrator because the intercepted check was 
intended for a legitimate recipient. Someone is out there waiting for the check that the 
perpetrator has taken. The culprit in these schemes must worry not only about hiding the 
fraud from his employer, but also about appeasing the intended payee.  
 
The Fraudster Reconciling the Bank Statement 
A large percentage of those who perpetrate check tampering frauds are involved in 
reconciling the company’s bank statement. The bank statement that a company receives 
normally includes the canceled checks that have been cashed in the preceding period. A 
person who reconciles the accounts is therefore in a position to hide the existence of any 
fraudulent checks he has written to himself. He can remove the fraudulent checks or doctor 
the bank statement or both. 
 
In forged maker and authorized maker schemes, the perpetrator usually has to code the 
check in the disbursements journal. The most basic way to hide the check is to code it as 
“void” or to include no listing at all in the journal. Then, when the bank statement arrives, 
the perpetrator removes the fraudulent check from the stack of returned checks and destroys 
it. Now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physical evidence of the 
check on hand. Of course, the bank will have  a copy of the check, but unless someone 
questions the missing check it is unlikely that the company will discover the problem. And 
since the perpetrator is the one who reconciles the account, it is unlikely that anyone will 
even notice that the check is missing.  
 
The problem with simply omitting the fraudulent check from the disbursements journal is 
that the bank balance will not reconcile to the book balance. For instance, if the perpetrator 
wrote a $25,000 check to himself and did not record it, then the book balance will be 
$25,000 higher than the bank balance ($25,000  was taken out of the bank account by the 
perpetrator, but was not credited out of the company’s cash account). Employees usually 
omit their illicit checks from the disbursement journal only in situations where they 
personally reconcile the bank statement and no one reviews their work. This allows the 
perpetrator to “force” the reconciliation. In ot her words, the perpetrator reports that the 
bank balance and book balance match, when in fact they do not.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.528                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some victim organizations simply do not regularly reconcile their accounts. This makes it 
easy for employees to write checks without recording them. In a system where controls are 
so lax, almost any concealment method will be effective to disguise fraud. In fact, it may not 
be necessary to make any effort at all to conceal the crime.  
 
Some fraudsters physically alter the bank statement to cause it to match the company’s book 
balance. For instance, a person engaging in a forged maker scheme may decide to steal blank 
checks from the back of the checkbook. These checks are out of sequence and therefore will 
be listed last on the bank statement. This employee can delete the clump of fraudulent 
checks at the end of the statement and alter the balance to match the victim company’s 
books.  
 
Re-Alteration of Checks 
In altered payee schemes, remember that it is common for the perpetrator to take a check 
intended for a legitimate recipient, then doctor the instrument so that the perpetrator 
becomes the designated payee. But a canceled check payable to an employee will obviously 
raise suspicions of fraud. Therefore, some employees re-alter their fraudulent checks when 
the bank statement arrives. It has already been discussed how employees can alter checks by 
writing the payee’s name in erasable ink when the check is prepared. These employees obtain 
a signature for the check, then erase the true payee’s name and insert their own. When the 
fraudulent checks return with the bank statement, the employee erases his own name and re-
 enters the name of the proper payee. Thus there will be no appearance of mischief.  
 
Miscoding Fraudulent Checks 
Rather than omit a fraudulent check from the disbursements journal or list it as void, the 
perpetrator might write a check payable to himself but list a different person as the payee on 
the books. Usually, the fake payee is a regular vendor - a person or business that receives 
numerous checks from the victim company. Employees tend to pick known vendors for 
these schemes because one extra disbursement to a regular payee is less likely to be noticed 
than a check to an unknown person. 
 
The fraudster can also conceal a fraudulent check overstating the amounts of legitimate  
disbursements in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudulent check. For instance, 
assume that a company owes $10,000 to a part icular vendor. The fraudster would write a 
check to the vendor for $10,000, but enter the check in the disbursements journal as a 
$15,000 payment. The company’s disbursements are now overstated by $5,000. The 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.529 
fraudster can write a $5,000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disbursements 
journal. The bank balance and the book balance will still match, because the cost of the 
fraudulent check was absorbed when the amount of the legitimate check was overstated. Of 
course, the fact that the canceled checks do not match the entries in the journal should 
indicate potential fraud. This type of concealment is really only effective when the bank 
accounts are not closely monitored or where the employee is in charge of reconciling the 
accounts.  
 
If possible, employees will try to code their fraudulent checks to existing accounts that are 
rarely reviewed or to accounts that are very active. Most of these checks are coded to 
expense accounts or liability accounts. This particular method can be very effective in 
concealing fraud, particularly when the victim company is not diligent in reconciling its bank 
accounts. For instance, some organizations reconcile their accounts by cross-referencing 
check numbers with the amounts of the checks, but they do not verify that the payee on the 
actual check matches the payee listed in the disbursements journal. These organizations will 
be unable to detect checks that have been coded to the wrong payee in the disbursements 
journal.  
 
Re-Issuing Intercepted Checks 
In intercepted check schemes, the employee faces detection not only through his employer’s 
normal control procedures, but also from the intended recipients of the stolen checks. When 
the real payees do not receive their checks, they are likely to complain. These complaints, in 
turn, could trigger a fraud investigation. One way for an employee to avoid this problem is 
to issue new checks to the intended payees.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An accounts payable troubleshooter was in char ge of auditing payments to all suppliers, 
reviewing supporting documents, and mailing checks. Every once in a while, she would 
purposely fail to mail a check to a vendor. The vendor, of course, would call accounts 
payable about the late payment and would be told that his invoice had been paid on a 
certain date. Since accounts payable did not have a copy of the canceled check (because the 
fraudster was still holding it), they would call the troubleshooter to research the problem. 
Unfortunately for the company, the troubleshooter was the one who had stolen the check. 
She would tell accounts payable to issue another check to the vendor while she stopped 
payment on the first check. Thus the vendor received his payment. Meanwhile, instead of 
stopping payment on the first check, the troubleshooter deposited it into her own account. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.530                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bogus Supporting Documents 
While some perpetrators attempt to wipe out all traces of their fraudulent disbursements by 
destroying the checks, forcing the bank reconciliation and so on, others opt to justify their 
checks by manufacturing fake support for them. These persons prepare false payment 
vouchers, including false invoices, purchase orders, and/or receiving reports to create an 
appearance of authenticity. This concealment strategy is only practical when the employee 
writes checks payable to someone other than himself (such as an accomplice or a shell 
company). A check made payable to an employee may raise suspicions regardless of any 
supporting documents that he manufactures. 
 
Detection of Check Tampering Schemes 
Account Analysis Through Cut-Off Statements 
Bank cut-off statements should be requested for 10 to 15 days after the closing date of the 
balance sheet. These statements may be used to detect cash fraud during periods between 
monthly bank statements. Cut-off statements are often used by auditors to ensure that 
income and expenses are reported in the proper period. If employees know that at any time 
during the month a cut-off statement may be ordered and reviewed independently, cash 
fraud will be less likely. 
 
A cut-off statement is generally ordered from the bank, delivered unopened to the auditor 
(or outsider), and reconciled. It can be ordered at any time during the accounting cycle. If 
cut-off bank statements are not ordered or received, obtain the following period bank 
statement and perform account analysis and investigation. 
 
Bank Reconciliations 
Copies of the bank reconciliations and account analysis should be obtained along with the 
complete set of bank statements on all checking and savings accounts, as well as certificates 
of deposit and other interest bearing and non-interest bearing accounts. From the 
reconciliations, perform the following tests: 
• Confirm the mathematical accuracy of the reconciliation. 
• Examine the bank statement for possible alterations. 
• Trace the balance on the statement back to the bank cut-off and bank confirmation 
statements. 
• Foot the balance to the company’s ledger. 
                                                          
2 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.531 
• Trace the deposits in transit to the bank cut-off statement to ensure recording in  
proper period. 
• Examine canceled checks and compare to the list of outstanding checks. 
• Sample supporting documentation of checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify supporting documentation on outstanding checks written for a material amount. 
• Verify accuracy of nonoperational-cash or ca sh-equivalent accounts (CDs and other 
investment accounts). Analysis should include the verification of the institution holding 
the funds, interest rate, maturity date, beginning and ending balances, and current period 
activity. Book and bank balances should be compared and any accruals of interest 
analyzed.3 
 
Bank Confirmation  
Another method related to the cut-off statement is the bank confirmation request. Unlike 
the cut-off statement, this detection method is merely a report of the balance in the account 
as of the date requested. This balance should be requested to confirm the statement balance 
as well as any other necessary balance date. If fraud is occurring at the bank reconciliation 
stage, this independent confirmation may prove to be very helpful. 
 
Check-Tampering Red Flags 
The following irregularities may indicate fraud:  
• Voided checks may indicate employees have embezzled cash and charged the 
embezzlement to expense accounts. When the expense is paid (from accounts payable), 
fraudulent checks are marked and entered as void and removed from distribution points. 
An account-balancing journal entry is then made. The list of voided checks should be 
verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank statements should be reviewed to 
ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
• Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
• Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be 
closely scrutinized. Such an examination may indicate other schemes such as conflicts of 
interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense reimbursements. 
• Altered endorsements or dual endorsements of returned checks may indicate possible 
tampering.  
  
                                                          
3 Id. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.532                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Returned checks with obviously forged or questionable signature endorsements should 
be verified with original payee.  
• Altered payees on returned checks should be verified with intended payee. 
• Duplicate or counterfeit checks indicate fraud. These checks may be traceable to 
depositor through bank check coding.  
• Questionable deposit dates should be matched to the corresponding customer accounts. 
• An examination of all cash advances may reveal that not all advances are properly 
documented and, therefore, inappropriate payments have been made to employees. 
• Customer complaints regarding payments not being applied to their accounts should be 
investigated. 
• A questionable payee or payee address on a check should trigger review of the 
corresponding check and support documentation. 
 
Prevention of Check Tampering Schemes  
Check Disbursement Controls 
The following list of activities will help tighten controls and possibly deter employees from 
giving in to the temptation to commit check fraud. 
• Check “cutting” and preparation is not done by a signatory on the account.  
• Checks are mailed immediately after signing. 
• Theft control procedures are adhered to (see below). 
• Accounts payable records and addresses are secure from possible tampering. Changes in 
vendor information should be verified. 
• Bank statements should be reviewed diligently ensuring that amounts and signatures 
have not been altered. 
• Bank reconciliations should be completed immediately after monthly statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented 
within 30 days from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable.  
• Bank reconciliations are not made by signatories on the account.  
• Bank statements should be reconciled and reviewed by more than one person.  
• Appropriate separation of duties should be documented and adhered to. 
• Detailed comparisons are routinely made between check payees and the payees listed in 
the cash disbursement journal. 
• Personnel responsible for handling and coding checks are periodically rotated, keeping 
total personnel involved to a minimum. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.533 
Bank-Assisted Controls 
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud. Consider 
the following control measures that may be taken in regard to a firm’s checking accounts.  
• Establish maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
• Use positive pay banking controls. Positive pay allows a company and its bank to work 
together to detect fraudulent items presented for payment. The company provides the 
bank with a list of checks and amounts that are written each day. The bank verifies items 
presented for payment against the company’s lis t. The bank rejects items that are not on 
the list. Investigations are conducted as to the origin of “nonlist” items. 
 
Physical Tampering Prevention 
The following list details check-tampering prevention techniques that are being used today, 
by some institutions, to secure businesses’ check integrity. These methods can be used 
individually or in combination.  
• Signature line void safety band — The word VOID appears on the check when 
photocopied. 
• Rainbow foil bar — A horizontal colored bar placed on the check fades and is shaded 
from one bar to the next. Photocopied foil bars appear solid. 
• Holographic safety border — Holographic images are created in a way that reflect light to 
reveal a three-dimensional graphic. 
• Embossed pearlescent numbering—Checks are numbered using a technique that is 
revealed by a colored highlighter pen or by a bright light held behind the check. 
• Other chemical voids—Checks reveal an image or the word VOID when treated with an 
eradicator chemical. 
• Micro line printing — Extremely small print is too small to read with the naked eye and 
becomes distorted when photocopied. 
• High resolution microprinting—Images are produced on the check in high resolution, 
2,400 dots per inch or higher. This technique is very difficult to reproduce. 
• Security inks—Checks contain inks that react with eradication chemicals, reducing a 
forger’s ability to modify the check. 
• Chrome coloring — The use of chrome-like coloring deters photocopying even with 
color copiers. The chrome pattern or numbering develops solid black. 
• Watermark backers — Hidden images can only be  seen when the check is held at an 
angle. This image is very difficult to reproduce. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.534                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Ultraviolet ink — This ink displays an image or message when held under ultraviolet 
lighting. 
 
Check Theft Control Procedures 
It is very important to provide internal controls that will minimize the possibility of check 
tampering and theft. Below is a list of items that should be incorporated into companies’ 
policies and procedures to help deter check tampering.  
• New checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers. 
• Unused checks should be stored in a secure area such as a safe, vault, or other locked 
area. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel only. Routinely 
change keys and access codes to storage areas. 
• Review all hiring procedures. One of the most  important means of fighting fraud is to 
not hire people with questionable backgrounds. Develop a distinct separation of duties 
in the accounts payable department, including written policies and procedures for all 
personnel who have the opportunity to handle checks, from mailroom clerks to the 
CEO.  
• Use electronic payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments, 
eliminating the use of paper checks. 
• Report lost or stolen checks immediately. 
• Properly and securely store canceled checks. 
• Destroy unused checks for accounts that have been closed.  
• Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing. 
 
 



:


check tamper
check tamper is uniqu among the fraudul disburs scheme becaus it is the on
group in which the perpetr physic prepar the fraudul check in most fraudul
disburs scheme the culprit gener a payment to himself by submit some fals
document to the victim organ such as an invoic or a timecard the fals document
repres a claim for payment and caus the victim organ to issu a check that the
perpetr can convert
check tamper scheme ar fundament differ in these scheme the perpetr
take physic control of a check and make it payabl to himself through on of sever
method check tamper fraud depend upon factor such as access to the compani
checkbook access to bank statement and the abil to forg signatur or alter other
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1511
inform on the face of the check most check tamper crime fall into on of four
categori forg maker scheme forg endors scheme alter paye scheme and
author maker scheme
forg maker scheme
the legal definit of forgeri includ not onli the sign of anoth person name to a
document such as a check with a fraudul intent but also the fraudul alter of a
genuin instrument thi definit is so broad that it would encompass all check tamper
scheme for the purpos of thi text the definit of forgeri ha been narrow to fit the
fraud examin need in order to properli distinguish the variou method us by
individu to tamper with check the concept of forgeri will be limit to those case in
which an individu sign anoth person name on a check
the person who sign a check is known as the maker of the check a forg maker
scheme then mai be defin as a check tamper scheme in which an employe
misappropri a check and fraudul affix the signatur of an author maker
thereon see forg maker scheme flowchart fraud that involv other type of check
tamper such as the alter of the paye or the chang of the dollar amount ar
classifi separ
in order to forg a check an employe must have access to a blank check he must be abl
to produc a convinc forgeri of an author signatur and he must be abl to conceal
hi crime conceal is a univers problem in check tamper scheme the method
us ar basic the same whether on is deal with a forg maker scheme an
intercept check scheme a conceal check scheme or an author maker scheme
therefor conceal issu will be discuss as a group later in thi section
obtain the check
employe with access to compani check
on cannot forg a compani check unless on first possess a compani check most
forgeri scheme ar commit by account payabl clerk offic manag bookkeep or
other employe whose duti typic includ the prepar of compani check these
ar peopl who have access to the compani checkbook on a regular basi and ar therefor
in the best posit to steal blank check
1 henri campbel black black law dictionari fifth edit st paul west publish co 1979 p 585
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1512 2011 fraud examin manual
employe lack access to compani check
if the perpetr doe not have access to the compani checkbook through hi work duti
he will have to find other mean of misappropri a check the wai a person steal a
check depend larg on how the checkbook is handl within a particular compani in
some circumst the checkbook is poorli guard left in unattend area where anyon
can get to it in other compani where blank check ar kept in a restrict area the
perpetr might have surreptiti obtain a kei or combin to thi area an
accomplic might provid blank check for the perpetr in return for a portion of the
stolen fund perhap a secretari see the checkbook left on a manag desk or a custodian
come across blank check in an unlock desk drawer
in some compani check ar comput gener when thi is the case an employe who
know the password for prepar and issu check can usual obtain as mani unsign
check as he desir there ar an unlimit number of wai to steal a check each
depend on the wai in which a particular compani guard it blank check in some
instanc employe go so far as to produc counterfeit check
exampl
an employe had an accomplic who work for a checkprint compani the accomplic
wa abl to print blank check with the account number of the perpetr compani the
perpetr then wrote over 100000 worth of forgeri on these counterfeit check
to whom is the check made payabl
to the perpetr
onc a blank check ha been obtain the perpetr must decid to whom it should be
made payabl in most instanc forg check ar made payabl to the perpetr himself
so that thei can be easili convert cancel check that ar payabl to an employe should
be close scrutin for the possibl of fraud
if the perpetr own hi own busi or ha establish a shell compani he will usual
write fraudul check to these entiti rather than himself these check ar not as
obvious fraudul on their face as check made payabl to an employe at the same
time these check ar easi to convert becaus the perpetr own the entiti to which the
check ar payabl
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1513
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1514 2011 fraud examin manual
to an accomplic
if a fraudster is work with an accomplic he can make the forg check payabl to that
person the accomplic then cash the check and split the monei with the employeefraudst
becaus the check is payabl to the accomplic in hi true ident it is easili
convert an addit benefit to us an accomplic is that a cancel check payabl to a
thirdparti accomplic is not as like to rais suspicion as a cancel check to an employe
the obviou drawback to us an accomplic in a scheme is that the employeefraudst
usual ha to share the proce of the scheme
to cash
the perpetr mai also write check payabl to cash in order to avoid list himself as
the paye check made payabl to cash howev must still be endors the perpetr
will have to sign hi own name or forg the name of anoth in order to convert the check
check payabl to cash ar usual view more skeptic than check payabl to person
or busi some institut mai refus to cash check made payabl to cash
to vendor
not all fraudster forg compani check to obtain cash some employe us forg maker
scheme to purchas good or servic for their own benefit these fraudul check ar
made payabl to thirdparti vendor who ar uninvolv in the fraud for instanc an
employe might forg a compani check to bui a comput for hi home the comput
vendor is not involv in the fraud at all furthermor if the victim organ regularli
doe busi with thi vendor the person who reconcil the compani account mai
assum that the check wa us for a legitim busi expens
forg the signatur
after the employe ha obtain and prepar a blank check he must forg an author
signatur in order to convert the check the most obviou method and the on that come
to mind when on think of the word forgeri is to simpli take pen in hand and sign the
name of an author maker
freehand forgeri
the difficulti a fraudster encount when physic sign the author maker name is
in creat a reason approxim of the true signatur if the forgeri appear authent
the perpetr will probabl have no problem cash the check in truth the forg
signatur mai not have to be particularli accur mani fraudster cash forg check at
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1515
liquor store groceri store or other institut that ar known to be less than dilig in
verifi signatur and identif nevertheless a poorli forg signatur is a clear red
flag of fraud the maker signatur on can cele check should be review for forgeri
dure the reconcili process
photocopi forgeri
to guarante an accur forgeri some employe make photocopi of legitim
signatur the signatur of an author signer is copi from some document such as a
busi letter onto a transpar then the transpar is laid over a blank check so that
the signatur copi onto the maker line of the check the result is a check with a perfect
signatur of an author maker
automat checksign instrument
compani that issu a larg number of check sometim util automat checksign
instrument autom signatur ar either produc with manual instrument like
signatur stamp or thei ar print by comput obvious an employe who ha access to
an automat checksign instrument will have no troubl forg the signatur of
author maker even the most rudimentari control procedur should sever limit
access to these instrument
exampl
a fiscal offic maintain a set of manual check that were unknown to other person in
the compani the compani us an autom check signer and the custodian of the signer
let the offic have uncontrol access to it us the manual check and the compani
check signer the fiscal offic wa abl to write over 90000 worth of fraudul check to
himself over a period of approxim four year
the same principl appli to computergener signatur access to the password or
program that print sign check should be restrict specif exclud those who
prepar check and those who reconcil the bank statement
convert the check
in order to convert the forg check the perpetr must endors it the endors is
typic made in the name of the paye on the check sinc identif is typic
requir when on seek to convert a check the perpetr usual need fake identif
if he forg check to real or fictiti third person as discuss earlier check payabl to
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1516 2011 fraud examin manual
cash requir the endors of the person convert them without a fake id the
perpetr will like have to endors these check in hi own name an employe
endors on a cancel check is obvious a red flag
forg endors scheme
forg endors ar those check tamper scheme in which an employe intercept a
compani check intend to pai a third parti and convert the check by endors it in the
thirdparti name in some case the employe also sign hi own name as a second
endors see forg endors scheme flowchart
a fraudster main dilemma in a forg endors scheme and in all intercept check
scheme for that matter is gain access to a check after it ha been sign the fraudster
must either steal the check between the point where it is sign and the point where it is
deliv or he must rerout the check caus it to be deliv to a locat where he can
retriev it the manner us to steal a check depend larg upon the wai the compani
handl outgo disburs anyon who is allow to handl sign check mai be in
a good posit to intercept them
intercept check befor deliveri
employe involv in deliveri of check
obvious the employe in the best posit to intercept sign check ar those whose
duti includ the handl and deliveri of sign check the most obviou exampl is a
mailroom employe who open outgo mail contain sign check and steal the
check other personnel with access to outgo check might includ account payabl
employe payrol clerk and secretari
poor control of sign check
unfortun employe ar often abl to intercept sign check becaus of poor intern
control for instanc mani employe simpli find sign check left unattend in the
work area of the person who sign them or the person charg with their deliveri in
these case it is easi for the perpetr to steal the check anoth common breakdown
occur when the person who prepar a check is also involv in the deliveri of that check
onc it ha been sign
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1517
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1518 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a highlevel manag with author to disburs employe benefit instruct account
payabl personnel to return sign benefit check to him instead of immedi deliv
them to their intend recipi these instruct were not question due to the
manag level of author within the compani the perpetr simpli took the check
that were return to him and deposit them into hi person bank account forg the
endors of the intend paye
in addit to the preced exampl secretari or clerk who prepar check for their
boss to sign ar often respons for mail those check it is veri simpl for those
employe to make out a fraudul check and obtain a signatur know that the boss will
give the sign check right back to them thi scheme is indic of the kei problem with
occup fraud trust in order for an offic to run effici highlevel employe must
be abl to reli on their subordin yet thi relianc is precis what put subordin in a
posit to defraud their employ
theft of return check
check that have been mail and ar later return to the victim for some reason such as
an incorrect address ar often target for theft by fraudster employe with access to
incom mail ar abl to intercept these return check and convert them by forg the
endors of the intend paye
exampl
a manag took and convert approxim 130000 worth of check that were
return due to noncurr address he also stole outgo check cash them and then
declar them lost the fraudster wa well known at hi bank and wa abl to convert the
check by claim that he wa do it as a favor to the real paye who were too busi to
come to the bank the fraudster wa abl to continu with hi scheme becaus the natur
of hi compani busi wa such that the recipi of the misdeliv check were often
not awar that the victim compani ow them monei therefor thei did not complain
when their check fail to arriv in addit the perpetr had complet control over the
bank reconcili so he could issu new check to those paye who did complain then
forc the reconcili make it appear that the bank balanc and book balanc
match when in fact thei did not
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1519
rerout the deliveri of check
employe mai also misappropri sign check by alter the address to which those
check ar mail these perpetr usual replac the legitim address of the paye with
an address where the employe can retriev the check such as the employe home or a
po box the employe control in other instanc the perpetr might purpos
misaddress a check so that it will be return as undeliver the employe steal the check
after it is return to the victim organ
obvious proper separ of duti should preclud anyon who prepar disburs
from be involv in their deliveri nevertheless the person who prepar a check is often
allow to address and mail it as well in some instanc where proper control ar in place
employe ar still abl to caus the misdeliveri of check
exampl
a clerk in the custom servic depart of a mortgag compani wa in charg of
chang the mail address of properti ow ner she wa assign a password that gave
her access to make these chang the clerk wa transfer to a new depart where on
of her duti wa the issuanc of check to properti owner unfortun her supervisor
forgot to cancel her old password when the clerk realiz thi oversight she would request
a check for a certain properti owner then sign onto the system with her old password and
chang the address of that properti owner the check would be sent to her the next dai
the employe would us her old password to reenter the system and replac the proper
address so that there would be no record of where the check h ad been sent thi fraudster
scheme result in a loss of over 250000 to the victim compani
convert the stolen check
onc a check ha been intercept the perpetr can cash it by forg the paye
signatur henc the term forg endors scheme depend on where he tri to cash the
check the perpetr mai or mai not need fake identif at thi stage if a perpetr
is requir to produc identif in order to cash hi stolen check and if he doe not
have a fake id in the paye name he mai us a dual endors to cash or deposit the
check in other word the perpetr forg the paye signatur as though the paye had
transfer the check to him then the perpetr endors the check in hi own name and
convert it when the bank statement is reconcil dual endors on check should
alwai rais suspicion particularli when the second signer is an employe of the compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1520 2011 fraud examin manual
alter paye scheme
the second type of intercept check scheme is the alter paye scheme thi is a form of
check tamper in which an employe intercept a compani check intend for a third
parti and alter the paye design so that the check can be convert by the employe or
an accomplic see alter paye scheme flowchart the employe insert hi own
name the name of an accomplic or the name of a fictiti entiti on the paye line of the
check the alter essenti make the check payabl to the employe or an
accomplic so there is no need to forg an endors and no need to obtain fals
identif
alter check prepar by other insert a new paye
the method us to alter the paye design on a check depend larg on how that
check is prepar and intercept incident the amount of the check mai also be alter
at the same time and by the same method as the paye design check prepar by
other can be intercept by ani of the method discuss in the forg endors
section abov when the perpetr intercept a check that ha been prepar by someon
els there ar basic two method that mai be emploi to chang the paye the first is
to insert the fals paye name in place of the true paye the true name might be
scratch out with a pen or cover up with whiteout anoth name is then enter on the
paye design line these kind of alter ar usual simpl to detect
a more sophist method occur when the perpetr of the fraud enter the account
payabl system and chang the name of paye befor check ar gener thi can be
accomplish by anyon with a password that permit access to the account payabl
address file
exampl
an account payabl employe wa so trust that her manag allow her to us hi
comput password in hi absenc the password permit access to the account payabl
address file thi employe wait until the manag wa absent then select a legitim
vendor with whom her compani did a lot of busi she held up the vendor invoic for
the dai and after work us the manag login code to chang the vendor name and
address to that of a fictiti compani the new name and address were run through the
account payabl cycl with an old invoic number caus a fraudul check to be issu
the victim compani had an autom duplic invoic test but the perpetr
circumv it substitut 1 for i and 0 zero for capit o the next dai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1521
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1522 2011 fraud examin manual
the employe would replac the true vendor name and address and mutil the check
regist so that the check payabl to the fi ctitiou vendor wa conceal approxim
300000 in fals check wa issu us thi method
alter check prepar by other tack on
the other method that can be us by perpetr to alter check prepar by other is
tack on addit letter or word to the end of the real paye design for
instanc check payabl to abc compani might be alter to read ab collin the
employe then cash the check in the name of ab collin it sound like an odd scheme
but it realli happen in these case the simpl inclus of a filler line after the paye
design would prevent the loss
in addit to alter the paye design the amount of the check can be alter by
tack on extra number if the person prepar the check is careless and leav space for
extra number in the amount portion of the check
alter check prepar by the fraudster eras ink
when the perpetr prepar the check that is to be alter the scheme tend to be a bit
more sophist the reason for thi is obviou if the perpetr is abl to prepar the
check himself he can prepar it with the thought of how the paye design will be
chang on of the most common wai to prepar a check for alter is to write or type
the paye name and possibl the amount in eras ink after an author maker sign
the check the perpetr retriev the check eras the paye name and insert hi own
in some case employe even obtain signatur on check written in pencil
exampl
a bookkeep type out small check to a local supplier and had the owner of the compani
sign them the bookkeep then us her eras typewrit to lift the paye design and
amount from the check she enter her own name as the paye and rais the amount
precipit for instanc the owner might si gn a 10 check that later becam a 10000
check these check were enter in the disburs journal as payment for aggreg
inventori to the compani largest supplier who receiv sever larg check each month
the bookkeep stole over 300000 fr om her employ in thi scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1523
where a proper separ of duti is in place a person who prepar a check should not be
permit to handl the check after it ha been sign nevertheless thi is exactli what
happen in most alter paye scheme the person who prepar the check know that the
maker of the check will return it to him after it ha been sign
alter check prepar by the fraudster blank check
the most egregi exampl of poor control in the handl of sign check is on in
which the perpetr prepar a check leav the paye design blank and submit it to an
author maker who sign the check and return it to the employe obvious thi make
it quit easi for the perpetr to design himself or an accomplic as the paye common
sens should prevent anyon from give a sign blank check to anoth person
nevertheless thi is a fairli common occurr especi when the perpetr is a trust
longtim employe
convert alter check
as with all other type of fraudul check convers is accomplish by endors the
check in the name of the paye convers of fraudul check ha alreadi been discuss
in previou section and will not be reexamin here
author maker scheme
the final check tamper scheme the author maker scheme mai be the most difficult
to defend against an author maker scheme occur when an employe with signatur
author on a compani account write fraudul check for hi own benefit and sign hi
own name as the maker see author maker scheme flowchart the perpetr in
these scheme can write and sign fraudul check himself he doe not have to alter a pre
prepar instrument or forg the maker signatur
overrid control through intimid
when a person is author to sign compani check prepar the check is easi the
employe simpli write and sign the instrument the same wai he would with ani legitim
check in most situat check signer ar owner offic or otherwis highrank
employe and thu have or can obtain access to all the blank check thei need even if
compani polici prohibit check signer from handl blank check the perpetr can
normal us hi influenc to overcom thi impedi what employe is go to tell the
ceo that he cant have a blank check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1524 2011 fraud examin manual
the most basic wai an employe accomplish an author maker scheme is to overrid
control design to prevent fraud most author signatori have high level of influenc
within their compani the perpetr us thi influenc to deflect question about
fraudul transact
a common author maker scheme is on in which a major owner or sole sharehold
us hi compani as a sort of alter ego pai person expens directli out of compani
account instead of pai person expens the perpetr might cut check directli to
himself hi friend or famili us fear of job secur as a weapon the owner can
maintain a work environ in which employe ar afraid to question these transact
highlevel manag or offic might also us their author to overrid control in
compani with absent or inattent ownership intimid can plai a larg part in the
commiss and conceal of type of occup fraud involv power individu
exampl
the manag of a sale offic stole approxim 150000 from hi employ over a two
year period thi manag had primari checksign author and abus thi power by
write compani check to pai hi person expens the manag fraudul activ
were well known by certain member of hi staff but these employe career were control
by the perpetr fear of lose their job combin with lack of a proper whistleblow
structur prevent the manag employe from report hi fraud
poor control
although overrid control is the most blatant wai to execut an author maker
scheme it is not the most common far more of these scheme occur becaus no on is
pai attent to the account and few control ar present to prevent fraud some
employe who write check to themselv or to purchas item for themselv simpli code
the check to expens account that thei know ar not like to be review
the failur to close monitor account is supplement by lack of intern control
specif the absenc of separ of duti in the cash disburs process
employe who commit author maker fraud ar often in charg of reconcil the bank
account of the busi thi is especi common in small busi employe with
total control over the disburs process ar in a perfect posit to write fraudul
check for their own benefit
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1525
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1526 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
the bookkeep of a mediums compani wa charg with pai all bill and
prepar the compani payrol she had access to an automat check signer and total
control over compani bank account the bookkeep wrote extra check to herself code
the expenditur to payrol and destroi the ca ncele check when thei were return with
the bank statement
conceal check tamper scheme
most check tamper scheme do not consist of a singl occurr but instead continu
over a period of time therefor conceal the fraud is arguabl the most import aspect
of the scheme if an employe intend to steal a larg sum of monei and escap to south
america hide the fraud might not be so import but the vast major of occup
fraudster remain employe of their compani as thei continu to steal from them which
make conceal the kei to the crime
conceal of the fraud mean not onli hide the ident of the crimin but in most
case hide the fact that a fraud ha even occur the most success fraud ar those in
which the victim organ is unawar that it is be rob obvious onc a busi
learn that it is be victim it will take step to staunch it bleed and the end of the
scheme will be at hand
check tamper scheme can present especi tricki conceal problem for dishonest
employe in other type of fraudul disburs such as invoic or payrol scheme
the fraudul payment is enter in the book as a legitim transact by someon other
than the perpetr the payment in those scheme ar gener by the product of
fals document that caus account payabl personnel to think that monei is ow to a
particular person or vendor when account payabl issu a disburs for a bogu
invoic it doe so becaus it believ the invoic to be genuin the payment is then enter
in the book as a legitim payment in other word the perpetr gener doe not have
to worri about conceal the payment in the book becaus someon els unwittingli doe
it for him but in forgeri and author maker scheme the perpetr is the on write
the check and he is usual the on code the check in the disburs journal he must
explain the check on the book
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1527
forg endors scheme and alter paye scheme ar differ becaus thei involv
the alter of check that were alreadi prepar and code by someon els
nevertheless thei creat a problem for the perpetr becaus the intercept check wa
intend for a legitim recipi someon is out there wait for the check that the
perpetr ha taken the culprit in these scheme must worri not onli about hide the
fraud from hi employ but also about appeas the intend paye
the fraudster reconcil the bank statement
a larg percentag of those who perpetr check tamper fraud ar involv in
reconcil the compani bank statement the bank statement that a compani receiv
normal includ the cancel check that have been cash in the preced period a
person who reconcil the account is therefor in a posit to hide the exist of ani
fraudul check he ha written to himself he can remov the fraudul check or doctor
the bank statement or both
in forg maker and author maker scheme the perpetr usual ha to code the
check in the disburs journal the most basic wai to hide the check is to code it as
void or to includ no list at all in the journal then when the bank statement arriv
the perpetr remov the fraudul check from the stack of return check and destroi
it now there is no record of the payment in the journal and no physic evid of the
check on hand of cours the bank will have a copi of the check but unless someon
question the miss check it is unlik that the compani will discov the problem and
sinc the perpetr is the on who reconcil the account it is unlik that anyon will
even notic that the check is miss
the problem with simpli omit the fraudul check from the disburs journal is
that the bank balanc will not reconcil to the book balanc for instanc if the perpetr
wrote a 25000 check to himself and did not record it then the book balanc will be
25000 higher than the bank balanc 25000 wa taken out of the bank account by the
perpetr but wa not credit out of the compani cash account employe usual
omit their illicit check from the disburs journal onli in situat where thei
person reconcil the bank statement and no on review their work thi allow the
perpetr to forc the reconcili in ot her word the perpetr report that the
bank balanc and book balanc match when in fact thei do not
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1528 2011 fraud examin manual
some victim organ simpli do not regularli reconcil their account thi make it
easi for employe to write check without record them in a system where control ar
so lax almost ani conceal method will be effect to disguis fraud in fact it mai not
be necessari to make ani effort at all to conceal the crime
some fraudster physic alter the bank statement to caus it to match the compani book
balanc for instanc a person engag in a forg maker scheme mai decid to steal blank
check from the back of the checkbook these check ar out of sequenc and therefor will
be list last on the bank statement thi employe can delet the clump of fraudul
check at the end of the statement and alter the balanc to match the victim compani
book
realter of check
in alter paye scheme rememb that it is common for the perpetr to take a check
intend for a legitim recipi then doctor the instrument so that the perpetr
becom the design paye but a cancel check payabl to an employe will obvious
rais suspicion of fraud therefor some employe realter their fraudul check when
the bank statement arriv it ha alreadi been discuss how employe can alter check by
write the paye name in eras ink when the check is prepar these employe obtain
a signatur for the check then eras the true paye name and insert their own when the
fraudul check return with the bank statement the employe eras hi own name and re
enter the name of the proper paye thu there will be no appear of mischief
miscod fraudul check
rather than omit a fraudul check from the disburs journal or list it as void the
perpetr might write a check payabl to himself but list a differ person as the paye on
the book usual the fake paye is a regular vendor a person or busi that receiv
numer check from the victim compani employe tend to pick known vendor for
these scheme becaus on extra disburs to a regular paye is less like to be notic
than a check to an unknown person
the fraudster can also conceal a fraudul check overst the amount of legitim
disburs in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudul check for instanc
assum that a compani ow 10000 to a part icular vendor the fraudster would write a
check to the vendor for 10000 but enter the check in the disburs journal as a
15000 payment the compani disburs ar now overst by 5000 the
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1529
fraudster can write a 5000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disburs
journal the bank balanc and the book balanc will still match becaus the cost of the
fraudul check wa absorb when the amount of the legitim check wa overst of
cours the fact that the cancel check do not match the entri in the journal should
indic potenti fraud thi type of conceal is realli onli effect when the bank
account ar not close monitor or where the employe is in charg of reconcil the
account
if possibl employe will try to code their fraudul check to exist account that ar
rare review or to account that ar veri activ most of these check ar code to
expens account or liabil account thi particular method can be veri effect in
conceal fraud particularli when the victim compani is not dilig in reconcil it bank
account for instanc some organ reconcil their account by crossreferenc
check number with the amount of the check but thei do not verifi that the paye on the
actual check match the paye list in the disburs journal these organ will
be unabl to detect check that have been code to the wrong paye in the disburs
journal
reissu intercept check
in intercept check scheme the employe face detect not onli through hi employ
normal control procedur but also from the intend recipi of the stolen check when
the real paye do not receiv their check thei ar like to complain these complaint in
turn could trigger a fraud investig on wai for an employe to avoid thi problem is
to issu new check to the intend paye
exampl
an account payabl troubleshoot wa in char ge of audit payment to all supplier
review support document and mail check everi onc in a while she would
purpos fail to mail a check to a vendor the vendor of cours would call account
payabl about the late payment and would be told that hi invoic had been paid on a
certain date sinc account payabl did not have a copi of the cancel check becaus the
fraudster wa still hold it thei would call the troubleshoot to research the problem
unfortun for the compani the troubleshoot wa the on who had stolen the check
she would tell account payabl to issu anoth check to the vendor while she stop
payment on the first check thu the vendor receiv hi payment meanwhil instead of
stop payment on the first check the troubleshoot deposit it into her own account
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1530 2011 fraud examin manual
bogu support document
while some perpetr attempt to wipe out all trace of their fraudul disburs by
destroi the check forc the bank reconcili and so on other opt to justifi their
check by manufactur fake support for them these person prepar fals payment
voucher includ fals invoic purchas order andor receiv report to creat an
appear of authent thi conceal strategi is onli practic when the employe
write check payabl to someon other than himself such as an accomplic or a shell
compani a check made payabl to an employe mai rais suspicion regardless of ani
support document that he manufactur
detect of check tamper scheme
account analysi through cutoff statement
bank cutoff statement should be request for 10 to 15 dai after the close date of the
balanc sheet these statement mai be us to detect cash fraud dure period between
monthli bank statement cutoff statement ar often us by auditor to ensur that
incom and expens ar report in the proper period if employe know that at ani time
dure the month a cutoff statement mai be order and review independ cash
fraud will be less like
a cutoff statement is gener order from the bank deliv unopen to the auditor
or outsid and reconcil it can be order at ani time dure the account cycl if
cutoff bank statement ar not order or receiv obtain the follow period bank
statement and perform account analysi and investig
bank reconcili
copi of the bank reconcili and account analysi should be obtain along with the
complet set of bank statement on all check and save account as well as certif
of deposit and other interest bear and noninterest bear account from the
reconcili perform the follow test
confirm the mathemat accuraci of the reconcili
examin the bank statement for possibl alter
trace the balanc on the statement back to the bank cutoff and bank confirm
statement
foot the balanc to the compani ledger
2 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1531
trace the deposit in transit to the bank cutoff statement to ensur record in
proper period
examin cancel check and compar to the list of outstand check
sampl support document of check written for a materi amount
verifi support document on outstand check written for a materi amount
verifi accuraci of nonoperationalcash or ca shequival account cd and other
invest account analysi should includ the verif of the institut hold
the fund interest rate matur date begin and end balanc and current period
activ book and bank balanc should be compar and ani accrual of interest
analyzed3
bank confirm
anoth method relat to the cutoff statement is the bank confirm request unlik
the cutoff statement thi detect method is mere a report of the balanc in the account
as of the date request thi balanc should be request to confirm the statement balanc
as well as ani other necessari balanc date if fraud is occur at the bank reconcili
stage thi independ confirm mai prove to be veri help
checktamp red flag
the follow irregular mai indic fraud
void check mai indic employe have embezzl cash and charg the
embezzl to expens account when the expens is paid from account payabl
fraudul check ar mark and enter as void and remov from distribut point
an accountbalanc journal entri is then made the list of void check should be
verifi against physic copi of the check bank statement should be review to
ensur that void check have not been process
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be
close scrutin such an examin mai indic other scheme such as conflict of
interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens reimburs
alter endors or dual endors of return check mai indic possibl
tamper
3 id
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1532 2011 fraud examin manual
return check with obvious forg or question signatur endors should
be verifi with origin paye
alter paye on return check should be verifi with intend paye
duplic or counterfeit check indic fraud these check mai be traceabl to
depositor through bank check code
question deposit date should be match to the correspond custom account
an examin of all cash advanc mai reveal that not all advanc ar properli
document and therefor inappropri payment have been made to employe
custom complaint regard payment not be appli to their account should be
investig
a question paye or paye address on a check should trigger review of the
correspond check and support document
prevent of check tamper scheme
check disburs control
the follow list of activ will help tighten control and possibl deter employe from
give in to the temptat to commit check fraud
check cut and prepar is not done by a signatori on the account
check ar mail immedi after sign
theft control procedur ar adher to see below
account payabl record and address ar secur from possibl tamper chang in
vendor inform should be verifi
bank statement should be review dilig ensur that amount and signatur
have not been alter
bank reconcili should be complet immedi after monthli statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present
within 30 dai from the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
bank reconcili ar not made by signatori on the account
bank statement should be reconcil and review by more than on person
appropri separ of duti should be document and adher to
detail comparison ar routin made between check paye and the paye list in
the cash disburs journal
personnel respons for handl and code check ar period rotat keep
total personnel involv to a minimum
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1533
bankassist control
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud consid
the follow control measur that mai be taken in regard to a firm check account
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
us posit pai bank control posit pai allow a compani and it bank to work
togeth to detect fraudul item present for payment the compani provid the
bank with a list of check and amount that ar written each dai the bank verifi item
present for payment against the compani li t the bank reject item that ar not on
the list investig ar conduct as to the origin of nonlist item
physic tamper prevent
the follow list detail checktamp prevent techniqu that ar be us todai
by some institut to secur busi check integr these method can be us
individu or in combin
signatur line void safeti band the word void appear on the check when
photocopi
rainbow foil bar a horizont color bar place on the check fade and is shade
from on bar to the next photocopi foil bar appear solid
holograph safeti border holograph imag ar creat in a wai that reflect light to
reveal a threedimension graphic
emboss pearlesc numberingcheck ar number us a techniqu that is
reveal by a color highlight pen or by a bright light held behind the check
other chemic voidscheck reveal an imag or the word void when treat with an
erad chemic
micro line print extrem small print is too small to read with the nake ey and
becom distort when photocopi
high resolut microprintingimag ar produc on the check in high resolut
2400 dot per inch or higher thi techniqu is veri difficult to reproduc
secur inkscheck contain ink that react with erad chemic reduc a
forger abil to modifi the check
chrome color the us of chromelik color deter photocopi even with
color copier the chrome pattern or number develop solid black
watermark backer hidden imag can onli be seen when the check is held at an
angl thi imag is veri difficult to reproduc
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1534 2011 fraud examin manual
ultraviolet ink thi ink displai an imag or messag when held under ultraviolet
light
check theft control procedur
it is veri import to provid intern control that will minim the possibl of check
tamper and theft below is a list of item that should be incorpor into compani
polici and procedur to help deter check tamper
new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
unus check should be store in a secur area such as a safe vault or other lock
area secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel onli routin
chang kei and access code to storag area
review all hire procedur on of the most import mean of fight fraud is to
not hire peopl with question background develop a distinct separ of duti
in the account payabl depart includ written polici and procedur for all
personnel who have the opportun to handl check from mailroom clerk to the
ceo
us electron payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
elimin the us of paper check
report lost or stolen check immedi
properli and secur store cancel check
destroi unus check for account that have been close
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
