2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Forged Maker Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Forged Maker Schemes    
The legal definition of forgery includes not only the signing of another person’s name to a 
document (such as a check) with a fraudulent intent, but also the fraudulent alteration of a 
genuine instrument. This definition is so broad that it would encompass all check tampering 
schemes. For the purposes of this text, the definition of forgery has been narrowed to fit the 
fraud examiner’s needs. In order to properly distinguish the various methods used by 
individuals to tamper with checks, the concept of “forgeries” will be limited to those cases in 
which an individual signs another person’s name on a check.  
 
The person who signs a check is known as the “maker” of the check. A forged maker 
scheme, then, may be defined as a check tampering scheme in which an employee 
misappropriates a check and fraudulently affixes the signature of an authorized maker 
thereon. (See “Forged Maker Schemes” flowchart.) Frauds that involve other types of check 
tampering, such as the alteration of the payee or the changing of the dollar amount, are 
classified separately.  
 
In order to forge a check, an employee must have access to a blank check, he must be able 
to produce a convincing forgery of an authorized signature, and he must be able to conceal 
his crime. Concealment is a universal problem in check tampering schemes; the methods 
used are basically the same whether one is dealing with a forged maker scheme, an 
intercepted check scheme, a concealed check scheme, or an authorized maker scheme. 
Therefore, concealment issues will be discussed as a group later in this section.  
 



:


forg maker scheme
the legal definit of forgeri includ not onli the sign of anoth person name to a
document such as a check with a fraudul intent but also the fraudul alter of a
genuin instrument thi definit is so broad that it would encompass all check tamper
scheme for the purpos of thi text the definit of forgeri ha been narrow to fit the
fraud examin need in order to properli distinguish the variou method us by
individu to tamper with check the concept of forgeri will be limit to those case in
which an individu sign anoth person name on a check
the person who sign a check is known as the maker of the check a forg maker
scheme then mai be defin as a check tamper scheme in which an employe
misappropri a check and fraudul affix the signatur of an author maker
thereon see forg maker scheme flowchart fraud that involv other type of check
tamper such as the alter of the paye or the chang of the dollar amount ar
classifi separ
in order to forg a check an employe must have access to a blank check he must be abl
to produc a convinc forgeri of an author signatur and he must be abl to conceal
hi crime conceal is a univers problem in check tamper scheme the method
us ar basic the same whether on is deal with a forg maker scheme an
intercept check scheme a conceal check scheme or an author maker scheme
therefor conceal issu will be discuss as a group later in thi section
