2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Obtaining the Check


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Obtaining the Check 
EMPLOYEES WITH ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
One cannot forge a company check unless one first possesses a company check. Most 
forgery schemes are committed by accounts payable clerks, office managers, bookkeepers, or 
other employees whose duties typically include the preparation of company checks. These 
are people who have access to the company checkbook on a regular basis and are therefore 
in the best position to steal blank checks.  
                                                          
1 Henry Campbell Black, Black’s Law Dictionary, Fifth Edition  (St. Paul: West Publishing Co., 1979) p. 585.   
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.512                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EMPLOYEES LACKING ACCESS TO COMPANY CHECKS 
If the perpetrator does not have access to the company checkbook through his work duties, 
he will have to find other means of misappropriating a check. The way a person steals a 
check depends largely on how the checkbook is handled within a particular company. In 
some circumstances the checkbook is poorly guarded, left in unattended areas where anyone 
can get to it. In other companies where blank checks are kept in a restricted area, the 
perpetrator might have surreptitiously obtained a key or combination to this area. An 
accomplice might provide blank checks for the perpetrator in return for a portion of the 
stolen funds. Perhaps a secretary sees the checkbook left on a manager’s desk or a custodian 
comes across blank checks in an unlocked desk drawer.  
 
In some companies, checks are computer generated. When this is the case, an employee who 
knows the password for preparing and issuing checks can usually obtain as many unsigned 
checks as he desires. There are an unlimited number of ways to steal a check, each 
dependent on the way in which a particular company guards its blank checks. In some 
instances, employees go so far as to produce counterfeit checks.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee had an accomplice who worked for a check-printing company. The accomplice 
was able to print blank checks with the account number of the perpetrator’s company. The 
perpetrator then wrote over $100,000 worth of forgeries on these counterfeit checks.  
 



:


obtain the check
employe with access to compani check
on cannot forg a compani check unless on first possess a compani check most
forgeri scheme ar commit by account payabl clerk offic manag bookkeep or
other employe whose duti typic includ the prepar of compani check these
ar peopl who have access to the compani checkbook on a regular basi and ar therefor
in the best posit to steal blank check
1 henri campbel black black law dictionari fifth edit st paul west publish co 1979 p 585
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1512 2011 fraud examin manual
employe lack access to compani check
if the perpetr doe not have access to the compani checkbook through hi work duti
he will have to find other mean of misappropri a check the wai a person steal a
check depend larg on how the checkbook is handl within a particular compani in
some circumst the checkbook is poorli guard left in unattend area where anyon
can get to it in other compani where blank check ar kept in a restrict area the
perpetr might have surreptiti obtain a kei or combin to thi area an
accomplic might provid blank check for the perpetr in return for a portion of the
stolen fund perhap a secretari see the checkbook left on a manag desk or a custodian
come across blank check in an unlock desk drawer
in some compani check ar comput gener when thi is the case an employe who
know the password for prepar and issu check can usual obtain as mani unsign
check as he desir there ar an unlimit number of wai to steal a check each
depend on the wai in which a particular compani guard it blank check in some
instanc employe go so far as to produc counterfeit check
exampl
an employe had an accomplic who work for a checkprint compani the accomplic
wa abl to print blank check with the account number of the perpetr compani the
perpetr then wrote over 100000 worth of forgeri on these counterfeit check
