2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/To Whom Is the Check Made Payable?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


To Whom Is the Check Made Payable?  
TO THE PERPETRATOR 
Once a blank check has been obtained, the perpetrator must decide to whom it should be 
made payable. In most instances forged checks are made payable to the perpetrator himself 
so that they can be easily converted. Canceled checks that are payable to an employee should 
be closely scrutinized for the possibility of fraud.  
 
If the perpetrator owns his own business or has established a shell company, he will usually 
write fraudulent checks to these entities rather than himself. These checks are not as 
obviously fraudulent on their faces as checks made payable to an employee. At the same 
time, these checks are easy to convert because the perpetrator owns the entity to which the 
checks are payable.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.513 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.514                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
TO AN ACCOMPLICE  
If a fraudster is working with an accomplice, he can make the forged check payable to that 
person. The accomplice then cashes the check and splits the money with the employee-fraudster. 
Because the check is payable to the accomplice in his true identity, it is easily 
converted. An additional benefit to using an accomplice is that a canceled check payable to a 
third-party accomplice is not as likely to raise suspicion as a canceled check to an employee. 
The obvious drawback to using an accomplice in a scheme is that the employee-fraudster 
usually has to share the proceeds of the scheme. 
 
TO “CASH”   
The perpetrator may also write checks payable to “cash” in order to avoid listing himself as 
the payee. Checks made payable to cash, however, must still be endorsed. The perpetrator 
will have to sign his own name or forge the name of another in order to convert the check. 
Checks payable to “cash” are usually viewed more  skeptically than checks payable to persons 
or businesses. Some institutions may refuse to cash checks made payable to “cash.”  
 
TO VENDORS 
Not all fraudsters forge company checks to obtain cash. Some employees use forged maker 
schemes to purchase goods or services for their own benefit. These fraudulent checks are 
made payable to third-party vendors who are uninvolved in the fraud. For instance, an 
employee might forge a company check to buy a computer for his home. The computer 
vendor is not involved in the fraud at all. Furthermore, if the victim organization regularly 
does business with this vendor, the person who reconciles the company’s accounts may 
assume that the check was used for a legitimate business expense.  
 



:


to whom is the check made payabl
to the perpetr
onc a blank check ha been obtain the perpetr must decid to whom it should be
made payabl in most instanc forg check ar made payabl to the perpetr himself
so that thei can be easili convert cancel check that ar payabl to an employe should
be close scrutin for the possibl of fraud
if the perpetr own hi own busi or ha establish a shell compani he will usual
write fraudul check to these entiti rather than himself these check ar not as
obvious fraudul on their face as check made payabl to an employe at the same
time these check ar easi to convert becaus the perpetr own the entiti to which the
check ar payabl
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1513
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1514 2011 fraud examin manual
to an accomplic
if a fraudster is work with an accomplic he can make the forg check payabl to that
person the accomplic then cash the check and split the monei with the employeefraudst
becaus the check is payabl to the accomplic in hi true ident it is easili
convert an addit benefit to us an accomplic is that a cancel check payabl to a
thirdparti accomplic is not as like to rais suspicion as a cancel check to an employe
the obviou drawback to us an accomplic in a scheme is that the employeefraudst
usual ha to share the proce of the scheme
to cash
the perpetr mai also write check payabl to cash in order to avoid list himself as
the paye check made payabl to cash howev must still be endors the perpetr
will have to sign hi own name or forg the name of anoth in order to convert the check
check payabl to cash ar usual view more skeptic than check payabl to person
or busi some institut mai refus to cash check made payabl to cash
to vendor
not all fraudster forg compani check to obtain cash some employe us forg maker
scheme to purchas good or servic for their own benefit these fraudul check ar
made payabl to thirdparti vendor who ar uninvolv in the fraud for instanc an
employe might forg a compani check to bui a comput for hi home the comput
vendor is not involv in the fraud at all furthermor if the victim organ regularli
doe busi with thi vendor the person who reconcil the compani account mai
assum that the check wa us for a legitim busi expens
