2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Forging the Signature


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Forging the Signature 
After the employee has obtained and prepared a blank check, he must forge an authorized 
signature in order to convert the check. The most obvious method, and the one that comes 
to mind when one thinks of the word “forgery,” is to simply take pen in hand and sign the 
name of an authorized maker.  
 
FREE-HAND FORGERY 
The difficulty a fraudster encounters when physically signing the authorized maker’s name is 
in creating a reasonable approximation of the true signature. If the forgery appears authentic, 
the perpetrator will probably have no problem cashing the check. In truth, the forged 
signature may not have to be particularly accurate. Many fraudsters cash forged checks at 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.515 
liquor stores, grocery stores, or other institutions that are known to be less than diligent in 
verifying signatures and identification. Nevertheless, a poorly forged signature is a clear red 
flag of fraud. The maker’s signature on can celed checks should be reviewed for forgeries 
during the reconciliation process.  
 
PHOTOCOPIED FORGERIES 
To guarantee an accurate forgery, some employees make photocopies of legitimate 
signatures. The signature of an authorized signer is copied from some document (such as a 
business letter) onto a transparency, then the transparency is laid over a blank check so that 
the signature copies onto the maker line of the check. The result is a check with a perfect 
signature of an authorized maker.  
 
AUTOMATIC CHECK-SIGNING INSTRUMENTS 
Companies that issue a large number of checks sometimes utilize automatic check-signing 
instruments. Automated signatures are either produced with manual instruments like 
signature stamps or they are printed by computer. Obviously, an employee who has access to 
an automatic check-signing instrument will have no trouble forging the signatures of 
authorized makers. Even the most rudimentary control procedures should severely limit 
access to these instruments.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A fiscal officer maintained a set of manual checks that were unknown to other persons in 
the company. The company used an automated check signer and the custodian of the signer 
let the officer have uncontrolled access to it. Using the manual checks and the company’s 
check signer, the fiscal officer was able to write over $90,000 worth of fraudulent checks to 
himself over a period of approximately four years.  
 
The same principle applies to computer-generated signatures. Access to the password or 
program that prints signed checks should be restricted, specifically excluding those who 
prepare checks and those who reconcile the bank statement.  
 



:


forg the signatur
after the employe ha obtain and prepar a blank check he must forg an author
signatur in order to convert the check the most obviou method and the on that come
to mind when on think of the word forgeri is to simpli take pen in hand and sign the
name of an author maker
freehand forgeri
the difficulti a fraudster encount when physic sign the author maker name is
in creat a reason approxim of the true signatur if the forgeri appear authent
the perpetr will probabl have no problem cash the check in truth the forg
signatur mai not have to be particularli accur mani fraudster cash forg check at
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1515
liquor store groceri store or other institut that ar known to be less than dilig in
verifi signatur and identif nevertheless a poorli forg signatur is a clear red
flag of fraud the maker signatur on can cele check should be review for forgeri
dure the reconcili process
photocopi forgeri
to guarante an accur forgeri some employe make photocopi of legitim
signatur the signatur of an author signer is copi from some document such as a
busi letter onto a transpar then the transpar is laid over a blank check so that
the signatur copi onto the maker line of the check the result is a check with a perfect
signatur of an author maker
automat checksign instrument
compani that issu a larg number of check sometim util automat checksign
instrument autom signatur ar either produc with manual instrument like
signatur stamp or thei ar print by comput obvious an employe who ha access to
an automat checksign instrument will have no troubl forg the signatur of
author maker even the most rudimentari control procedur should sever limit
access to these instrument
exampl
a fiscal offic maintain a set of manual check that were unknown to other person in
the compani the compani us an autom check signer and the custodian of the signer
let the offic have uncontrol access to it us the manual check and the compani
check signer the fiscal offic wa abl to write over 90000 worth of fraudul check to
himself over a period of approxim four year
the same principl appli to computergener signatur access to the password or
program that print sign check should be restrict specif exclud those who
prepar check and those who reconcil the bank statement
