2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Miscoding Fraudulent Checks


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Miscoding Fraudulent Checks 
Rather than omit a fraudulent check from the disbursements journal or list it as void, the 
perpetrator might write a check payable to himself but list a different person as the payee on 
the books. Usually, the fake payee is a regular vendor - a person or business that receives 
numerous checks from the victim company. Employees tend to pick known vendors for 
these schemes because one extra disbursement to a regular payee is less likely to be noticed 
than a check to an unknown person. 
 
The fraudster can also conceal a fraudulent check overstating the amounts of legitimate  
disbursements in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudulent check. For instance, 
assume that a company owes $10,000 to a part icular vendor. The fraudster would write a 
check to the vendor for $10,000, but enter the check in the disbursements journal as a 
$15,000 payment. The company’s disbursements are now overstated by $5,000. The 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.529 
fraudster can write a $5,000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disbursements 
journal. The bank balance and the book balance will still match, because the cost of the 
fraudulent check was absorbed when the amount of the legitimate check was overstated. Of 
course, the fact that the canceled checks do not match the entries in the journal should 
indicate potential fraud. This type of concealment is really only effective when the bank 
accounts are not closely monitored or where the employee is in charge of reconciling the 
accounts.  
 
If possible, employees will try to code their fraudulent checks to existing accounts that are 
rarely reviewed or to accounts that are very active. Most of these checks are coded to 
expense accounts or liability accounts. This particular method can be very effective in 
concealing fraud, particularly when the victim company is not diligent in reconciling its bank 
accounts. For instance, some organizations reconcile their accounts by cross-referencing 
check numbers with the amounts of the checks, but they do not verify that the payee on the 
actual check matches the payee listed in the disbursements journal. These organizations will 
be unable to detect checks that have been coded to the wrong payee in the disbursements 
journal.  
 



:


miscod fraudul check
rather than omit a fraudul check from the disburs journal or list it as void the
perpetr might write a check payabl to himself but list a differ person as the paye on
the book usual the fake paye is a regular vendor a person or busi that receiv
numer check from the victim compani employe tend to pick known vendor for
these scheme becaus on extra disburs to a regular paye is less like to be notic
than a check to an unknown person
the fraudster can also conceal a fraudul check overst the amount of legitim
disburs in the journal in order to absorb the cost of a fraudul check for instanc
assum that a compani ow 10000 to a part icular vendor the fraudster would write a
check to the vendor for 10000 but enter the check in the disburs journal as a
15000 payment the compani disburs ar now overst by 5000 the
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1529
fraudster can write a 5000 check to himself and list that check as void in the disburs
journal the bank balanc and the book balanc will still match becaus the cost of the
fraudul check wa absorb when the amount of the legitim check wa overst of
cours the fact that the cancel check do not match the entri in the journal should
indic potenti fraud thi type of conceal is realli onli effect when the bank
account ar not close monitor or where the employe is in charg of reconcil the
account
if possibl employe will try to code their fraudul check to exist account that ar
rare review or to account that ar veri activ most of these check ar code to
expens account or liabil account thi particular method can be veri effect in
conceal fraud particularli when the victim compani is not dilig in reconcil it bank
account for instanc some organ reconcil their account by crossreferenc
check number with the amount of the check but thei do not verifi that the paye on the
actual check match the paye list in the disburs journal these organ will
be unabl to detect check that have been code to the wrong paye in the disburs
journal
