2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Check-Tampering Red Flags


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Check-Tampering Red Flags 
The following irregularities may indicate fraud:  
• Voided checks may indicate employees have embezzled cash and charged the 
embezzlement to expense accounts. When the expense is paid (from accounts payable), 
fraudulent checks are marked and entered as void and removed from distribution points. 
An account-balancing journal entry is then made. The list of voided checks should be 
verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank statements should be reviewed to 
ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
• Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
• Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be 
closely scrutinized. Such an examination may indicate other schemes such as conflicts of 
interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense reimbursements. 
• Altered endorsements or dual endorsements of returned checks may indicate possible 
tampering.  
  
                                                          
3 Id. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.532                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Returned checks with obviously forged or questionable signature endorsements should 
be verified with original payee.  
• Altered payees on returned checks should be verified with intended payee. 
• Duplicate or counterfeit checks indicate fraud. These checks may be traceable to 
depositor through bank check coding.  
• Questionable deposit dates should be matched to the corresponding customer accounts. 
• An examination of all cash advances may reveal that not all advances are properly 
documented and, therefore, inappropriate payments have been made to employees. 
• Customer complaints regarding payments not being applied to their accounts should be 
investigated. 
• A questionable payee or payee address on a check should trigger review of the 
corresponding check and support documentation. 
 



:


checktamp red flag
the follow irregular mai indic fraud
void check mai indic employe have embezzl cash and charg the
embezzl to expens account when the expens is paid from account payabl
fraudul check ar mark and enter as void and remov from distribut point
an accountbalanc journal entri is then made the list of void check should be
verifi against physic copi of the check bank statement should be review to
ensur that void check have not been process
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be
close scrutin such an examin mai indic other scheme such as conflict of
interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens reimburs
alter endors or dual endors of return check mai indic possibl
tamper
3 id
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1532 2011 fraud examin manual
return check with obvious forg or question signatur endors should
be verifi with origin paye
alter paye on return check should be verifi with intend paye
duplic or counterfeit check indic fraud these check mai be traceabl to
depositor through bank check code
question deposit date should be match to the correspond custom account
an examin of all cash advanc mai reveal that not all advanc ar properli
document and therefor inappropri payment have been made to employe
custom complaint regard payment not be appli to their account should be
investig
a question paye or paye address on a check should trigger review of the
correspond check and support document
