2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Check Tampering/Check Theft Control Procedures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Check Theft Control Procedures 
It is very important to provide internal controls that will minimize the possibility of check 
tampering and theft. Below is a list of items that should be incorporated into companies’ 
policies and procedures to help deter check tampering.  
• New checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers. 
• Unused checks should be stored in a secure area such as a safe, vault, or other locked 
area. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel only. Routinely 
change keys and access codes to storage areas. 
• Review all hiring procedures. One of the most  important means of fighting fraud is to 
not hire people with questionable backgrounds. Develop a distinct separation of duties 
in the accounts payable department, including written policies and procedures for all 
personnel who have the opportunity to handle checks, from mailroom clerks to the 
CEO.  
• Use electronic payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments, 
eliminating the use of paper checks. 
• Report lost or stolen checks immediately. 
• Properly and securely store canceled checks. 
• Destroy unused checks for accounts that have been closed.  
• Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing. 
 
 



:


check theft control procedur
it is veri import to provid intern control that will minim the possibl of check
tamper and theft below is a list of item that should be incorpor into compani
polici and procedur to help deter check tamper
new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
unus check should be store in a secur area such as a safe vault or other lock
area secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel onli routin
chang kei and access code to storag area
review all hire procedur on of the most import mean of fight fraud is to
not hire peopl with question background develop a distinct separ of duti
in the account payabl depart includ written polici and procedur for all
personnel who have the opportun to handl check from mailroom clerk to the
ceo
us electron payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
elimin the us of paper check
report lost or stolen check immedi
properli and secur store cancel check
destroi unus check for account that have been close
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
