2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Billing Schemes 
The asset misappropriation schemes discussed up to this point—skimming, larceny, register 
schemes, and check tampering—all require the perpetrator of the scheme to physically take 
cash or checks from his employer. The next three sections will cover a different kind of asset 
misappropriation scheme, one which allows the perpetrator to misappropriate company 
funds without ever actually handling cash or checks while at work. These succeed by making 
a false claim for payment upon the victim organization. This group consists of billing schemes  
(which attack the purchasing function of a company), payroll schemes, and expense reimbursement 
schemes. The most common of these is the billing scheme.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.535 
Billing schemes are a popular form of employee fraud mainly because they offer the 
prospect of large rewards. Since the majority of most businesses’ disbursements are made in 
the purchasing cycle, larger thefts can be hidden through false-billing schemes than through 
other kinds of fraudulent disbursements. There are three principal types of billing schemes: 
false invoicing via shell companies, false invoicing via non-accomplice vendors, and personal 
purchases made with company funds.  
 
Invoicing Via Shell Companies 
Forming a Shell Company 
Shell companies are fictitious entities created for the purpose of committing fraud. They may 
be nothing more than a fabricated name and a post office box that an employee uses to 
collect disbursements from false billings. However, since the checks received will be made 
out in the name of the shell company, the perpetrator will normally also set up a bank 
account in his new company’s name, so he can deposit and cash the fraudulent checks. (See 
“False Billings from Shell Companies” flowchart.) 
 
A person will probably have to present a bank with a certificate of incorporation or an 
assumed-name certificate in order to open a bank account for a shell company. These are 
documents that a company must obtain through a state or local government. The documents 
can be forged, but it is more likely that the perpetrator will simply file the requisite 
paperwork and obtain legitimate documents from his state or county. This can usually be 
accomplished for a small fee, the cost of which will be more than offset by a successful fraud 
scheme.  
 
If it is discovered that a vendor is falsely billing a company, investigators for the victim 
company may be able to identify the owner of the suspect company by reviewing its business 
registration filings, which are a matter of public record.  
 
To avoid being detected through a records search, some perpetrators form their shell 
companies under another name. It is common, for instance, for employees to set up shell 
companies in the name of a spouse or other close relative. Male fraudsters often establish 
shell companies under their wives’ maiden names. An employee might also form the 
company under a completely fictitious name. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.536                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.537 
EXAMPLE 
An employee used a coworker’s identification to form a shell vendor. The fraudster then 
proceeded to bill his employer  for approximately $20,000 in false services. The resulting 
checks were deposited in the account of the shell company and currency was withdrawn from 
the account through an ATM.  
 
Another issue involved in forming a shell company is the entity’s address—the place where 
fraudulent checks will be collected. Often, an employee rents a post office box and lists it as 
the mailing address of his shell company. Some employees list their home address instead. A 
comparison of employee addresses to vendor addresses might reveal shell companies in an 
accounts payable system.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department head set up a dummy company us ing his residence as the mailing address. 
Over a two-year period, this man submitted over $250,000 worth of false invoices. 
Eventually, the scheme was detected by a newly hired clerk. The clerk was processing an 
invoice when she noticed that the address of the vendor was the same as her boss’s address. 
(By a lucky coincidence, the clerk had typed a personal letter for her boss earlier that day 
and remembered his address.) Had the department head used a P.O. box instead of his 
home address on the invoices, his scheme might have continued indefinitely. 
 
Employees often use their home addresses to collect fraudulent disbursements because 
many businesses are wary of sending checks to vendors that have a post office box for a 
mailing address. Other common collection sites for shell company schemes are the addresses 
of relatives, friends, or accomplices.  
 
Submitting False Invoices 
Once a shell company has been formed and a bank account has been opened, the corrupt 
employee begins billing his employer. Invoices can be manufactured by various means such 
as a professional printer, a personal computer, or a typewriter. False invoices do not always 
have to be of professional quality to generate fraudulent disbursements. Typewritten 
invoices are often sufficient to generate checks.  
 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.538                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Self-Approval of Fraudulent Invoices 
The difficulty in a shell company scheme is not usually in producing the invoices, but in 
getting the victim organization to pay them. Authorization for the fictitious purchase (and 
therefore payment of the bill) is the key. In a large percentage of shell company cases, the 
perpetrator is in a position to approve payment on the very invoices he is fraudulently 
submitting. It is obvious the duties of preparing and approving vouchers should be separated 
to avoid this kind of scheme. 
 
In companies where a proper separation of duties exists, the employee with approval 
authority sometimes creates fraudulent vouchers or purchase orders and forges the signature 
of the person who is in charge of preparing these documents. Then the perpetrator approves 
payment on the fraudulent vouchers he has generated. This makes it appear that two 
employees have signed off on the voucher as mandated by the victim organization’s 
controls.  
 
Not all companies require the completion of payment vouchers before they will issue checks. 
In some enterprises, checks are written based on less formal procedures, such as the 
submission of “check requests.” These requests simply list the name of the payee, the 
amount to be paid, and a brief narrative stating the reason for the check. Obviously, this is 
not a very sound procedure for preventing fraud. Dishonest employees have little trouble 
running shell company schemes in organizations that operate this way.  
 
“Rubber Stamp” Supervisors  
If an employee cannot authorize payments himself, the next best thing is if the person who 
has that authority is inattentive or overly trusting. “Rubber stamp” supervisors like this are 
destined to be targeted by unethical employees. In some cases, supervisors are attentive to 
the purchase orders they are asked to authorize, but they lack the technical knowledge to 
spot fraud as it is happening. For instance, a manager or administrator might not completely 
understand the costs associated with upgrading computer software to modernize a work 
area. This manager will have to rely on his subordinates who have the necessary technical 
expertise to determine that costs are being kept in line. The subordinates may be able to take 
advantage of this situation to cause the company to overpay for the equipment required to 
upgrade the system.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.539 
Reliance on False Documents  
When an employee does not have approval authority for purchases and does not have the 
benefit of a rubber stamp supervisor, he must run his vouchers through the normal accounts 
payable process. The success of this kind of scheme will depend on the apparent authenticity 
of the false voucher he creates. If the perpetrator can generate purchase orders and receiving 
reports that corroborate the information on the fraudulent invoice from his shell company, 
he can fool accounts payable into issuing a check. 
 
Collusion 
Collusion among several employees is sometimes used to overcome well-designed internal 
controls. For example, in a company with proper separation of duties, the functions of 
purchasing goods or services, authorizing the purchase, receiving the goods or services, and 
making the payment to the vendor should all be separated. If this process is strictly adhered 
to, it will be extremely difficult for any single employee to commit a false-billing scheme. But 
if several employees work together, they can overcome the internal controls of their 
employer.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A warehouse foreman and a parts ordering clerk conspired to purchase approximately 
$300,000 of nonexistent supplies. The parts ordering clerk would initiate the false 
transactions by obtaining approval to place orders for parts he claimed were needed. The 
orders were then sent to a vendor who, acting in conjunction with the two employee 
fraudsters, prepared false invoices, which were sent to the victim company. Meanwhile, the 
warehouse foreman verified receipt of the fi ctitious shipments of incoming supplies. The 
perpetrators were therefore able to compile complete vouchers for the fraudulent purchases 
without overstepping their normal duties.  
 
Even if all internal controls are observed, at some point a company must rely on its 
employees to be honest. One of the purposes of separating duties is to prevent any one 
person from having too much control over a particular business function. It provides a built-in 
monitoring mechanism where every person’s actions are in some way verified by another 
person. But if everyone is corrupt, even proper controls will not prevent fraud.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.540                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Purchases of Services Rather than Goods   
Most shell company schemes involve the purchase of services rather than goods. The 
primary reason for this is that services are not tangible. If an employee sets up a shell 
company to make fictitious sales of goods to his employer, these goods will obviously never 
arrive. By comparing its purchases to its inventory levels, the victim organization might 
detect the fraud. It is much more difficult, on the other hand, for the victim organization to 
verify that the services were never rendered. For this reason, many employees involved in 
shell company schemes bill their employers for things like “consulting services.” 
 
Pass-Through Schemes 
In most shell company schemes, victim organizations are billed for completely fictitious 
purchases of goods or services. However, there is a subcategory of shell-company schemes 
in which actual goods or services are sold to the victim company. These are known as pass-through 
schemes.  
 
Pass-through schemes are usually undertaken by employees in charge of purchasing on 
behalf of the victim company. Instead of buying merchandise directly from a vendor, the 
employee sets up a shell company and purchases the merchandise through that fictitious 
entity. He then resells the merchandise to his employer from the shell company at an  
inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A department director was put in charge of purchasing computer equipment. Because of his 
expertise on the subject and his high standing within the company, he was unsupervised in 
this task. The director set up  a shell company in another state and bought used computers 
through the shell company, then turned around and sold them to his employer at a greatly 
exaggerated price. The money from the victim company’s first installment on the computers 
was used to pay the shell company’s debts to the real vendors. Subsequent payments were 
profits for the bogus company. The scheme cost the victim company over $1 million.  
 
Invoicing Via Nonaccomplice Vendors 
Pay-and-Return Schemes 
Instead of using shell companies in their overbilling schemes, some employees generate 
fraudulent disbursements by using the invoices of legitimate third-party vendors who are not 
a part of the fraud scheme. In a pay-and-return  scheme, an employee intentionally mishandles 
payments that are owed to legitimate vendors. (See “Pay and Return Schemes” flowchart.) 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.541 
One way to do this is to purposely double-p ay an invoice. For instance, a clerk might 
intentionally pay an invoice twice, then call the vendor and request that one of the checks be 
returned. The clerk then intercepts the returned check.  
 
Another way to accomplish a pay-and-return scheme is to intentionally pay the wrong 
vendor. In this type of scheme an employee sends Vendor A’s check to  Vendor B. After the 
checks are mailed, the employee calls the vendors to explain the “mistake” and requests that 
they return the checks to his attention. When the checks arrive, the employee converts them 
and keeps the money. The employee usually runs the vouchers through the accounts payable 
system a second time so that the vendors eventually get their money.  
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.542                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An employee might also pay the proper vendor, but intentionally overpay him. Once again, 
the employee contacts the vendor, this time to request that the excess payment be returned. 
Finally, an employee might intentionally purchase excess merchandise, return the excess, and 
pocket the refund.  
 
Overbilling with a Nonaccomplice Vendor’s Invoices 
In most instances where an employee creates fraudulent invoices to overbill his employer, he 
uses a shell company. It is not as common for an employee to submit the invoice of an 
existing vendor. Nevertheless, in some instances an employee will undertake such a scheme 
by altering an existing vendor’s invoice or by  creating a counterfeit copy of a vendor’s 
invoice form.  
 
Personal Purchases With Company Funds  
Instead of undertaking billing schemes to generate cash, many fraudsters simply purchase 
personal items with their company’s money. Company accounts are used to buy items for 
employees, their businesses, their families, and so on.  
 
Personal Purchases Through False Invoicing 
Employees who undertake purchases schemes may do so by running unsanctioned invoices 
through the accounts payable system. The perpetrator in this type of scheme buys an item 
and submits the bill to his employer as if it represented a legitimate company expense. The 
victim company ends up unknowingly buying goods or services for a dishonest employee. 
(See “Invoice Purchasing Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
THE FRAUDSTER AS AUTHORIZER OF INVOICES 
The person who engages in a purchases scheme is often the very person in the company 
whose duties include authorizing  purchases. Obviously, proper controls should preclude 
anyone from approving his own purchases. Such poorly separated functions leave little other 
than his conscience to dissuade an employee from fraud. Fraud arises in part because of a 
perceived opportunity. An employee who sees that no one is reviewing his actions is more 
likely to turn to fraud than one who knows his company works diligently to detect employee 
theft.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.543 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a remote location of a large, publicly traded company was authorized to 
order supplies and approve vend or invoices for payment. For over a year, the manager 
routinely added personal items and supplies for his own business to orders made on behalf 
of his employer. The orders often included a strange mix of items. For instance, technical 
supplies and home furnishings might be purchased in the same order. Because the manager 
was in a position to approve his own purcha ses, he could get away with such blatantly 
obvious frauds. In addition to ordering personal items, the perpetrator changed the delivery 
address for certain supplies so that they would be delivered directly to his home or side 
business. This scheme cost the victim comp any approximately $300,000 in unnecessary 
purchases.  
 
In some situations, the perpetrator is authorized to approve purchases, but controls prevent 
him from also initiating purchase requests. This procedure is supposed to prevent an 
employee from purchasing personal items with company funds. Unfortunately, those with 
authority to approve purchases often have a good deal of control over their subordinates. 
These persons can use their influence to force subordinates to assist in purchases schemes. 
In other cases, the manager might simply initiate the purchase order himself by forging the 
subordinate’s signature.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Purchases for under $1,000 at a certain utility company could be made with limited value 
purchase orders (LPOs), which required the signatures of two people: the originator of a 
purchase request and the approver of the request. An LPO attached to an invoice for less 
than $1,000 would be paid by the accounts payable department. In this case, a manager 
bought goods and services on company accounts, and prepared LPOs for the purchases. (In 
some cases, the LPO would falsely describe the item to conceal the natu re of the purchase.) 
Once the LPO was prepared, the manager forced a clerk in his department to sign the 
document as the originator of  the transaction. The clerk, in timidated by her boss, did not 
question the authenticity of the LPOs. With two signatures affixed, the LPO appeared to 
be legitimate and the bills were paid. The sche me cost the victim company at least $25,000. 
 
FALSE PURCHASE REQUISITIONS 
If an employee does not have purchasing authority, he may get approval for a fraudulent 
purchase by misrepresenting the nature of the acquisition. In many companies, those with 
the power to authorize purchases are not always attentive to their duties. If a trusted 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.544                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subordinate says that the company needs to buy a certain item or items, busy supervisors 
often give rubber stamp approval to the purchase requisition. Additionally, employees 
sometimes misrepresent the nature of the items they are purchasing in order to pass a 
cursory review by their superiors.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An engineer bought over $30,000 worth of personal items. The engineer dealt directly with 
vendors and was also in charge of overseeing the receipt of the materials he purchased. He 
was therefore able to misrepresent the nature of the merchandise he bought, listing it as 
“maintenance items.” Vendor invoices were altered to agree to this description.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.545 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.546                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the perpetrator falsifies his purchase requisition in this manner, the fraud should be 
detected when delivery occurs. For example, if the purchase requisition says “maintenance 
items” but the vendor delivers home furnishings, it will be obvious that the perpetrator has 
committed fraud. The problem of delivery can be avoided if the perpetrator is in charge of 
receiving incoming shipments. He can verify that delivery of “maintenance items” was 
received. This is a breach of separation of duties, but unfortunately, it is fairly common for 
purchasing agents to verify delivery of their own orders. Even if the victim organization 
enforces a centralized delivery point, the perpetrator might enlist the aid of an accomplice in 
the receiving department to falsify the organization’s receiving reports.  
 
Another way to avoid detection at the delivery stage is to change the delivery address for 
purchases. Instead of being shipped to the victim organization, the items that the employee 
buys are sent directly to his home or business. The perpetrator might also order the goods 
drop shipped to a remote location.  
 
Personal Purchases on Credit Cards or Other Company Accounts  
Instead of running false invoices through accounts payable, some employees make personal 
purchases on company credit cards or on running accounts with vendors. (See “Purchases 
on Credit Card or Company Account” flowchar t.) Unlike invoicing schemes, prior approval 
for these purchases is not required. An employee with a company credit card can buy an 
item merely by signing his name (or forging someone else’s) at the time of purchase. Later 
review of the credit card statement, however, may detect the fraudulent purchase. 
Unfortunately, many high-level employees approve their own credit card expenses, making it 
very easy to carry out a purchasing scheme. 
 
Of course, only certain employees are authorized to use company credit cards. Employees 
without this privilege can only make fraudulent purchases with a company card if they first 
manage to get hold of one. To this end, company cards are sometimes stolen or “borrowed” 
from authorized users.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.547 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.548                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An accountant falsely added her name to a list of employees to whom cards were to be 
issued. She used her card to make fraudulent purchases, but forged the signatures of 
authorized cardholders to cover her tracks. Since no one knew she even had a company 
card, she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someone questioned the 
purchases. For over five years this employee continued her scheme, racking up a six figure 
bill on her employer’s account. In addition, she had control of the credit card statement and 
was able to code her purchases to various expense accounts, thereby further delaying 
detection of her crime. 
 
Another way to conceal a credit card purchasing scheme is to doctor the credit card 
statement so that fraudulent purchases do not show up. Some employees go so far as to 
destroy the real credit card statement and produce counterfeit copies on which their 
fraudulent purchases are omitted.  
 
Returning Merchandise for Cash 
The fraudulent purchases schemes discussed to this point have all involved false purchases 
of merchandise for the sake of obtaining the merchandise. In some cases, however, an 
employee buys items and then returns them for cash.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made fraudulent gains from a business travel account. The employee’s scheme 
began by purchasing tickets for herself and her family through her company’s travel budget. 
Poor separation of duties allowed the fraudster to order the tickets, receive them, prepare 
claims for payments, and distribute checks. The only review of her activities was made by a 
busy and rather uninterested supervisor who approved the employee’s claims without 
requiring support documentation. Eventually, the employee’s scheme evolved. She began to 
purchase airline tickets and return them for their cash value. An employee of the travel 
agency assisted in the scheme by encoding the tickets as though the fraudster had paid for 
them herself. That caused the airlines to pay refunds directly to the fraudster rather than to 
her employer. In the course of two years, this employee embezzled over $100,000 through 
her purchases scheme.  
 
Detection of Billing Schemes 
Because there are many variations of purchasing fraud schemes, there are also several 
detection methods. Detection methods are most effective when used in combinations. Each 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.549 
detection method is likely to point out anomalies that can then be investigated further to 
determine if a fraud scheme has occurred or is currently underway. Additionally, the 
detection methods will point out the weaknesses in internal controls and alert the auditor to 
potential opportunities for future fraud schemes. 
 
Analytical Review 
A review of the various general ledger accounts might reveal unusual or unexpected events. 
These events could be undetected purchasing fraud. For example, a comparison of inventory 
purchases in relationship to net sales might indicate that purchases are too high or too low 
for that level of sales. This might be a “red flag,” indicating excess purchasing schemes or 
fictitious sales schemes, respectively. 
 
Another analytical method uses a comparison of the inventory purchases of prior years with 
those of the current year. This comparison might indicate that an overbilling scheme or a 
duplicate-payment scheme is in progress. 
 
Analyses such as those described above can be performed for any acquisition of goods or 
services of a company. Analytical reviews are most effective in detecting fraud schemes that 
are large, such that the anomalies will be apparent. Other detection methods are more 
effective for fraud schemes that are smaller in relationship to the financial statements taken 
as a whole. Regardless of fraud size, examination of source documentation will be necessary. 
When an anomaly is detected, further investigation is required, which will demand an 
examination of source documentation. 
 
Computer-Assisted Analytical Review 
The computer can assist the auditor in determining the presence of unusual patterns in the 
acquisition or purchasing function. The computer can provide the auditor with a matrix of 
the purchasing activity to determine the presence of unusual patterns. An analysis of the 
following data might uncover purchasing schemes, such as: 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.550                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FRAUD SCHEME DETECTION METHOD 
Fictitious vendors Vendors and employees with matching addresses  
More than one vendor with the same address  
Vendors with only post office box addresses 
Overbilling 
 
Unusual, or “one-time,” extra charges  
Conflict of interest Vendors with employees who are employee family members 
An unusually high occurrence of complaints  
Complaints about specific vendors 
Higher prices and/or substandard quality 
 
Statistical Sampling 
As with inventory, the source documentation for purchases can be statistically sampled and 
examined for irregularities. Statistical samples can be drawn to test specific attributes. This 
detection method is particularly effective if a single attribute is suspected, such as fictitious 
vendors. A listing of all post office box addresses might reveal fictitious vendors. 
 
Vendor or Outsider Complaints 
Fraudulent schemes will often unravel because a vendor or other outsider complains to the 
employer or company. Complaints from customers, vendors, and others are good detection 
tools that can lead the fraud examiner to further inquiry. 
 
Site Visits — Observation 
A site visit will often reveal much about the internal control, or lack thereof, for any 
location. The observation of how the accounting transactions are actually transcribed will 
sometimes alert the fraud examiner to potential problem areas. 
 
Sample Audit Program 
The following audit program may be beneficial in detecting red flags to billing schemes: 
• Does the company have a purchasing department? If yes, is it independent of (1) the 
accounting department, (2) the receiving department, or (3) the shipping department? 
• Are purchases made only after the respective department heads sign purchase 
requisitions? 
• Are purchases made by means of purchase orders sent to vendors for all purchases or 
only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantity, price, terms, delivery 
requirements, and dates? 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.551 
• Is a list of unfilled purchase orders maintained and reviewed periodically? 
• Are purchase order forms prenumbered and is the sequence accounted for periodically? 
• Does the client maintain an approved vendors list? 
• Are items purchased only after competitive bids are obtained? If so, are competitive bids 
obtained for all purchases or only for purchases over a predetermined dollar limit? 
• Is a log maintained of all receipts? 
• Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? If yes, 
are receiving reports (1) prepared for all items, (2) prepared only for items that have 
purchase orders, or (3) renumbered? 
• At the time the items are received, does someone independent of the purchasing 
department check the merchandise before acceptance as to description, quantity,  
and condition? 
• Are copies of receiving reports (1) furnished to the accounting department, (2) furnished 
to the purchasing department, or (3) filed in the receiving department? 
• Are receipts under blanket purchase orders monitored, and are quantities exceeding 
authorized total returned to the vendor? 
• Are procedures adequate for the proper accounting for partial deliveries of  
purchase orders? 
• Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions? 
• Are vendors’ invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related 
liability is recorded? 
• Are invoices checked as to prices, extensions, footings, freight charges, allowances, and 
credit terms? 
• Are controls adequate to ensure that all available discounts are taken? 
• Are purchases recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed 
through cash disbursements? 
• Does a responsible employee assign the appropriate general ledger account distribution 
to which the invoices are to be posted? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that invoices have been processed before payment 
and to prevent duplicate payment (e.g., a block stamp)? 
• Does a responsible official approve invoices for payment? 
• Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to 
customers is promptly billed to the customers and recorded as both a receivable and  
a payable? 
• Are records of goods returned to vendors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.552                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Are unmatched receiving reports, purchase orders, and vendors’ invoices periodically 
reviewed and investigated for proper recording? 
• Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts? 
• Are statements from vendors regularly reviewed and reconciled against recorded 
liabilities? 
• Do adjustments to accounts payable (e.g., writing off of debit balances) require the 
approval of a designated official? 
• Are budgets used? If yes, are bu dgets approved by responsible officials, and are actual 
expenditures compared with budgeted amounts and variances analyzed and explained? 
• If excess inventory purchasing is suspected, verify that all inventory purchased was 
received (receiving report) at the proper location. An examination of receiving reports or 
invoices might reveal alternate shipping sites. 
 
Prevention of Billing Schemes 
The preventing of purchasing fraud can be especially difficult. Purchasing personnel are 
often held to a different standard than other employees of a company. For example, sales 
people often are given inducements or perquisites in order to persuade potential customers. 
These same inducements are offered to the purchasing personnel of the company from the 
company’s vendors. And yet, the company ex pects the purchasing personnel to perform 
their function without bias and to make decisions that are in the best interest of the 
company, without regard to the inducements offered by suppliers. Additionally, the 
personnel involved in the purchasing and payment functions are generally not compensated 
on a basis commensurate with their performance, as are salespeople. Therefore, there is a 
reverse incentive to perform in the best interest of the company. 
 
Probably the most effective purchasing fraud prevention measure is education (training) of 
the purchasing and payable personnel. The second most effective purchasing fraud 
prevention measure is an objective compensation arrangement with people responsible for 
purchasing decisions. 
 
Education (Training) 
Purchasing personnel should be trained thoroughly in ethical situations. The National 
Association of Purchasing Management has a code of ethics for its Certified Purchasing 
Managers. As a deterrent to fraud, companies might consider enrollment and certification. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.553 
Compensation 
People responsible for the purchasing decisions (buyers) should be paid well enough to 
reduce the motive and rationalization for fraud. Auditors can examine the compensation of 
purchasers and determine if any buyers were recently passed over for raises. This might be 
an indication of discontent that could lead to the formation of a fraudulent scheme against 
the employer. 
 
Proper Documentation 
Proper documentation for purchasing should include prenumbered and controlled purchase 
requisitions, purchase orders, receiving reports, and checks. 
 
Proper Approvals 
Before adding a vendor to the list, there should be an investigation of the “proposed” 
vendor, performed by someone other than the personnel in purchasing and accounts 
payable. If a vendor number is required before payment is made and the personnel 
responsible for the investigation assigns the vendor that identification number, then the 
buyer cannot place fictitious vendors on the list. Large or unusual purchases should be 
approved by someone independent of the purchasing department. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
For the best results and accountability, each company sufficient in size should have a 
separate purchasing department. Regardless of the company size, the purchasing function 
should be separate from the payment function. 
 
Hotlines 
Companies should study the feasibility of installing hotlines to provide a forum for 
complaints by employees and outsiders. 
 
Competitive Bidding 
Ensure that bid policies and procedures are thoroughly reviewed. Whenever possible, 
enforce competitive bidding. After the bidding process has been completed, a questionnaire 
can be sent to successful and unsuccessful bidders. This questionnaire can reveal areas to not 
only make the bidding process more effective but it also can provide a forum for bidders to 
express concerns over questionable or fraudulent activities. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.554                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Prevention Checklist 
The following is a list of billing scheme prevention methods that may be helpful in the 
deterrence of billing fraud: 
• Authorization procedures of purchase orders, invoicing, and payments should be 
documented and adhered to. 
• The accounts payable list of vendors should be periodically reviewed for strange vendors 
and addresses. 
• Payment codings should be reviewed for abnormal descriptions. 
• Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels on both a monthly and yearly 
basis. 
• Purchases and inventory levels should be compared and analyzed. (See Inventory and 
Other Assets). 
• Control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers should be 
in place. 
• A separation of duties between authorization, purchasing, receiving, shipping, and 
accounting should be in place. 
• Payment of vouchers should be periodically reviewed to ensure integrity of proper 
documentation. 
• Receiving and shipping reports should be reviewed for completeness and accuracy. 
• Asset information should include purchasing trails and other information. 
• Journal entries to inventory accounts should be strictly scrutinized. 
• Appropriate bank reconciliation and review procedures should be performed 
periodically, checking for out-of-place vendors and endorsements. 
• Credit card statements should be reviewed often for irregularities. 
• The validity of invoices with a post office box address should be verified. 
• Proper controls for the receipt and handling of “return to sender” checks should be 
installed. 
 
 



:


bill scheme
the asset misappropri scheme discuss up to thi pointskim larceni regist
scheme and check tamperingal requir the perpetr of the scheme to physic take
cash or check from hi employ the next three section will cover a differ kind of asset
misappropri scheme on which allow the perpetr to misappropri compani
fund without ever actual handl cash or check while at work these succe by make
a fals claim for payment upon the victim organ thi group consist of bill scheme
which attack the purchas function of a compani payrol scheme and expens reimburs
scheme the most common of these is the bill scheme
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1535
bill scheme ar a popular form of employe fraud mainli becaus thei offer the
prospect of larg reward sinc the major of most busi disburs ar made in
the purchas cycl larger theft can be hidden through falsebil scheme than through
other kind of fraudul disburs there ar three princip type of bill scheme
fals invoic via shell compani fals invoic via nonaccomplic vendor and person
purchas made with compani fund
invoic via shell compani
form a shell compani
shell compani ar fictiti entiti creat for the purpos of commit fraud thei mai
be noth more than a fabric name and a post offic box that an employe us to
collect disburs from fals bill howev sinc the check receiv will be made
out in the name of the shell compani the perpetr will normal also set up a bank
account in hi new compani name so he can deposit and cash the fraudul check see
fals bill from shell compani flowchart
a person will probabl have to present a bank with a certif of incorpor or an
assumednam certif in order to open a bank account for a shell compani these ar
document that a compani must obtain through a state or local govern the document
can be forg but it is more like that the perpetr will simpli file the requisit
paperwork and obtain legitim document from hi state or counti thi can usual be
accomplish for a small fee the cost of which will be more than offset by a success fraud
scheme
if it is discov that a vendor is fals bill a compani investig for the victim
compani mai be abl to identifi the owner of the suspect compani by review it busi
registr file which ar a matter of public record
to avoid be detect through a record search some perpetr form their shell
compani under anoth name it is common for instanc for employe to set up shell
compani in the name of a spous or other close rel male fraudster often establish
shell compani under their wive maiden name an employe might also form the
compani under a complet fictiti name
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1536 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1537
exampl
an employe us a cowork identif to form a shell vendor the fraudster then
proceed to bill hi employ for approxim 20000 in fals servic the result
check were deposit in the account of the shell compani and currenc wa withdrawn from
the account through an atm
anoth issu involv in form a shell compani is the entiti addressth place where
fraudul check will be collect often an employe rent a post offic box and list it as
the mail address of hi shell compani some employe list their home address instead a
comparison of employe address to vendor address might reveal shell compani in an
account payabl system
exampl
a depart head set up a dummi compani us ing hi resid as the mail address
over a twoyear period thi man submit over 250000 worth of fals invoic
eventu the scheme wa detect by a newli hire clerk the clerk wa process an
invoic when she notic that the address of the vendor wa the same as her bosss address
by a lucki coincid the clerk had type a person letter for her boss earlier that dai
and rememb hi address had the depart head us a po box instead of hi
home address on the invoic hi scheme might have continu indefinit
employe often us their home address to collect fraudul disburs becaus
mani busi ar wari of send check to vendor that have a post offic box for a
mail address other common collect site for shell compani scheme ar the address
of rel friend or accomplic
submit fals invoic
onc a shell compani ha been form and a bank account ha been open the corrupt
employe begin bill hi employ invoic can be manufactur by variou mean such
as a profession printer a person comput or a typewrit fals invoic do not alwai
have to be of profession qualiti to gener fraudul disburs typewritten
invoic ar often suffici to gener check
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1538 2011 fraud examin manual
selfapprov of fraudul invoic
the difficulti in a shell compani scheme is not usual in produc the invoic but in
get the victim organ to pai them author for the fictiti purchas and
therefor payment of the bill is the kei in a larg percentag of shell compani case the
perpetr is in a posit to approv payment on the veri invoic he is fraudul
submit it is obviou the duti of prepar and approv voucher should be separ
to avoid thi kind of scheme
in compani where a proper separ of duti exist the employe with approv
author sometim creat fraudul voucher or purchas order and forg the signatur
of the person who is in charg of prepar these document then the perpetr approv
payment on the fraudul voucher he ha gener thi make it appear that two
employe have sign off on the voucher as mandat by the victim organ
control
not all compani requir the complet of payment voucher befor thei will issu check
in some enterpris check ar written base on less formal procedur such as the
submiss of check request these request simpli list the name of the paye the
amount to be paid and a brief narr state the reason for the check obvious thi is
not a veri sound procedur for prevent fraud dishonest employe have littl troubl
run shell compani scheme in organ that oper thi wai
rubber stamp supervisor
if an employe cannot author payment himself the next best thing is if the person who
ha that author is inattent or overli trust rubber stamp supervisor like thi ar
destin to be target by uneth employe in some case supervisor ar attent to
the purchas order thei ar ask to author but thei lack the technic knowledg to
spot fraud as it is happen for instanc a manag or administr might not complet
understand the cost associ with upgrad comput softwar to modern a work
area thi manag will have to reli on hi subordin who have the necessari technic
expertis to determin that cost ar be kept in line the subordin mai be abl to take
advantag of thi situat to caus the compani to overpai for the equip requir to
upgrad the system
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1539
relianc on fals document
when an employe doe not have approv author for purchas and doe not have the
benefit of a rubber stamp supervisor he must run hi voucher through the normal account
payabl process the success of thi kind of scheme will depend on the appar authent
of the fals voucher he creat if the perpetr can gener purchas order and receiv
report that corrobor the inform on the fraudul invoic from hi shell compani
he can fool account payabl into issu a check
collus
collus among sever employe is sometim us to overcom welldesign intern
control for exampl in a compani with proper separ of duti the function of
purchas good or servic author the purchas receiv the good or servic and
make the payment to the vendor should all be separ if thi process is strictli adher
to it will be extrem difficult for ani singl employe to commit a falsebil scheme but
if sever employe work togeth thei can overcom the intern control of their
employ
exampl
a warehous foreman and a part order clerk conspir to purchas approxim
300000 of nonexist suppli the part order clerk would initi the fals
transact by obtain approv to place order for part he claim were need the
order were then sent to a vendor who act in conjunct with the two employe
fraudster prepar fals invoic which were sent to the victim compani meanwhil the
warehous foreman verifi receipt of the fi ctitiou shipment of incom suppli the
perpetr were therefor abl to compil complet voucher for the fraudul purchas
without overstep their normal duti
even if all intern control ar observ at some point a compani must reli on it
employe to be honest on of the purpos of separ duti is to prevent ani on
person from have too much control over a particular busi function it provid a builtin
monitor mechan where everi person action ar in some wai verifi by anoth
person but if everyon is corrupt even proper control will not prevent fraud
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1540 2011 fraud examin manual
purchas of servic rather than good
most shell compani scheme involv the purchas of servic rather than good the
primari reason for thi is that servic ar not tangibl if an employe set up a shell
compani to make fictiti sale of good to hi employ these good will obvious never
arriv by compar it purchas to it inventori level the victim organ might
detect the fraud it is much more difficult on the other hand for the victim organ to
verifi that the servic were never render for thi reason mani employe involv in
shell compani scheme bill their employ for thing like consult servic
passthrough scheme
in most shell compani scheme victim organ ar bill for complet fictiti
purchas of good or servic howev there is a subcategori of shellcompani scheme
in which actual good or servic ar sold to the victim compani these ar known as passthrough
scheme
passthrough scheme ar usual undertaken by employe in charg of purchas on
behalf of the victim compani instead of bui merchandis directli from a vendor the
employe set up a shell compani and purchas the merchandis through that fictiti
entiti he then resel the merchandis to hi employ from the shell compani at an
inflat price
exampl
a depart director wa put in charg of purchas comput equip becaus of hi
expertis on the subject and hi high stand within the compani he wa unsupervis in
thi task the director set up a shell compani in anoth state and bought us comput
through the shell compani then turn around and sold them to hi employ at a greatli
exagger price the monei from the victim compani first instal on the comput
wa us to pai the shell compani debt to the real vendor subsequ payment were
profit for the bogu compani the scheme cost the victim compani over 1 million
invoic via nonaccomplic vendor
payandreturn scheme
instead of us shell compani in their overbil scheme some employe gener
fraudul disburs by us the invoic of legitim thirdparti vendor who ar not
a part of the fraud scheme in a payandreturn scheme an employe intention mishandl
payment that ar ow to legitim vendor see pai and return scheme flowchart
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1541
on wai to do thi is to purpos doublep ay an invoic for instanc a clerk might
intention pai an invoic twice then call the vendor and request that on of the check be
return the clerk then intercept the return check
anoth wai to accomplish a payandreturn scheme is to intention pai the wrong
vendor in thi type of scheme an employe send vendor as check to vendor b after the
check ar mail the employe call the vendor to explain the mistak and request that
thei return the check to hi attent when the check arriv the employe convert them
and keep the monei the employe usual run the voucher through the account payabl
system a second time so that the vendor eventu get their monei
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1542 2011 fraud examin manual
an employe might also pai the proper vendor but intention overpai him onc again
the employe contact the vendor thi time to request that the excess payment be return
final an employe might intention purchas excess merchandis return the excess and
pocket the refund
overbil with a nonaccomplic vendor invoic
in most instanc where an employe creat fraudul invoic to overbil hi employ he
us a shell compani it is not as common for an employe to submit the invoic of an
exist vendor nevertheless in some instanc an employe will undertak such a scheme
by alter an exist vendor invoic or by creat a counterfeit copi of a vendor
invoic form
person purchas with compani fund
instead of undertak bill scheme to gener cash mani fraudster simpli purchas
person item with their compani monei compani account ar us to bui item for
employe their busi their famili and so on
person purchas through fals invoic
employe who undertak purchas scheme mai do so by run unsanct invoic
through the account payabl system the perpetr in thi type of scheme bui an item
and submit the bill to hi employ as if it repres a legitim compani expens the
victim compani end up unknowingli bui good or servic for a dishonest employe
see invoic purchas scheme flowchart
the fraudster as author of invoic
the person who engag in a purchas scheme is often the veri person in the compani
whose duti includ author purchas obvious proper control should preclud
anyon from approv hi own purchas such poorli separ function leav littl other
than hi conscienc to dissuad an employe from fraud fraud aris in part becaus of a
perceiv opportun an employe who see that no on is review hi action is more
like to turn to fraud than on who know hi compani work dilig to detect employe
theft
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1543
exampl
a manag of a remot locat of a larg publicli trade compani wa author to
order suppli and approv vend or invoic for payment for over a year the manag
routin ad person item and suppli for hi own busi to order made on behalf
of hi employ the order often includ a strang mix of item for instanc technic
suppli and home furnish might be purchas in the same order becaus the manag
wa in a posit to approv hi own purcha se he could get awai with such blatantli
obviou fraud in addit to order person item the perpetr chang the deliveri
address for certain suppli so that thei would be deliv directli to hi home or side
busi thi scheme cost the victim comp ani approxim 300000 in unnecessari
purchas
in some situat the perpetr is author to approv purchas but control prevent
him from also initi purchas request thi procedur is suppos to prevent an
employe from purchas person item with compani fund unfortun those with
author to approv purchas often have a good deal of control over their subordin
these person can us their influenc to forc subordin to assist in purchas scheme
in other case the manag might simpli initi the purchas order himself by forg the
subordin signatur
exampl
purchas for under 1000 at a certain util compani could be made with limit valu
purchas order lpo which requir the signatur of two peopl the origin of a
purchas request and the approv of the request an lpo attach to an invoic for less
than 1000 would be paid by the account payabl depart in thi case a manag
bought good and servic on compani account and prepar lpo for the purchas in
some case the lpo would fals describ the item to conceal the natu re of the purchas
onc the lpo wa prepar the manag forc a clerk in hi depart to sign the
document as the origin of the transact the clerk in timid by her boss did not
question the authent of the lpo with two signatur affix the lpo appear to
be legitim and the bill were paid the sche me cost the victim compani at least 25000
fals purchas requisit
if an employe doe not have purchas author he mai get approv for a fraudul
purchas by misrepres the natur of the acquisit in mani compani those with
the power to author purchas ar not alwai attent to their duti if a trust
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1544 2011 fraud examin manual
subordin sai that the compani need to bui a certain item or item busi supervisor
often give rubber stamp approv to the purchas requisit addition employe
sometim misrepres the natur of the item thei ar purchas in order to pass a
cursori review by their superior
exampl
an engin bought over 30000 worth of person item the engin dealt directli with
vendor and wa also in charg of overse the receipt of the materi he purchas he
wa therefor abl to misrepres the natur of the merchandis he bought list it as
mainten item vendor invoic were alter to agre to thi descript
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1545
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1546 2011 fraud examin manual
if the perpetr falsifi hi purchas requisit in thi manner the fraud should be
detect when deliveri occur for exampl if the purchas requisit sai mainten
item but the vendor deliv home furnish it will be obviou that the perpetr ha
commit fraud the problem of deliveri can be avoid if the perpetr is in charg of
receiv incom shipment he can verifi that deliveri of mainten item wa
receiv thi is a breach of separ of duti but unfortun it is fairli common for
purchas agent to verifi deliveri of their own order even if the victim organ
enforc a central deliveri point the perpetr might enlist the aid of an accomplic in
the receiv depart to falsifi the organ receiv report
anoth wai to avoid detect at the deliveri stage is to chang the deliveri address for
purchas instead of be ship to the victim organ the item that the employe
bui ar sent directli to hi home or busi the perpetr might also order the good
drop ship to a remot locat
person purchas on credit card or other compani account
instead of run fals invoic through account payabl some employe make person
purchas on compani credit card or on run account with vendor see purchas
on credit card or compani account flowchar t unlik invoic scheme prior approv
for these purchas is not requir an employe with a compani credit card can bui an
item mere by sign hi name or forg someon els at the time of purchas later
review of the credit card statement howev mai detect the fraudul purchas
unfortun mani highlevel employe approv their own credit card expens make it
veri easi to carri out a purchas scheme
of cours onli certain employe ar author to us compani credit card employe
without thi privileg can onli make fraudul purchas with a compani card if thei first
manag to get hold of on to thi end compani card ar sometim stolen or borrow
from author user
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1547
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1548 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an account fals ad her name to a list of employe to whom card were to be
issu she us her card to make fraudul purchas but forg the signatur of
author cardhold to cover her track sinc no on knew she even had a compani
card she would not be a prime suspect in the fraud even if someon question the
purchas for over five year thi employe continu her scheme rack up a six figur
bill on her employ account in addit she had control of the credit card statement and
wa abl to code her purchas to variou expens account therebi further delai
detect of her crime
anoth wai to conceal a credit card purchas scheme is to doctor the credit card
statement so that fraudul purchas do not show up some employe go so far as to
destroi the real credit card statement and produc counterfeit copi on which their
fraudul purchas ar omit
return merchandis for cash
the fraudul purchas scheme discuss to thi point have all involv fals purchas
of merchandis for the sake of obtain the merchandis in some case howev an
employe bui item and then return them for cash
exampl
an employe made fraudul gain from a busi travel account the employe scheme
began by purchas ticket for herself and her famili through her compani travel budget
poor separ of duti allow the fraudster to order the ticket receiv them prepar
claim for payment and distribut check the onli review of her activ wa made by a
busi and rather uninterest supervisor who approv the employe claim without
requir support document eventu the employe scheme evolv she began to
purchas airlin ticket and return them for their cash valu an employe of the travel
agenc assist in the scheme by encod the ticket as though the fraudster had paid for
them herself that caus the airlin to pai refund directli to the fraudster rather than to
her employ in the cours of two year thi employe embezzl over 100000 through
her purchas scheme
detect of bill scheme
becaus there ar mani variat of purchas fraud scheme there ar also sever
detect method detect method ar most effect when us in combin each
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1549
detect method is like to point out anomali that can then be investig further to
determin if a fraud scheme ha occur or is current underwai addition the
detect method will point out the weak in intern control and alert the auditor to
potenti opportun for futur fraud scheme
analyt review
a review of the variou gener ledger account might reveal unusu or unexpect event
these event could be undetect purchas fraud for exampl a comparison of inventori
purchas in relationship to net sale might indic that purchas ar too high or too low
for that level of sale thi might be a red flag indic excess purchas scheme or
fictiti sale scheme respect
anoth analyt method us a comparison of the inventori purchas of prior year with
those of the current year thi comparison might indic that an overbil scheme or a
duplicatepay scheme is in progress
analys such as those describ abov can be perform for ani acquisit of good or
servic of a compani analyt review ar most effect in detect fraud scheme that
ar larg such that the anomali will be appar other detect method ar more
effect for fraud scheme that ar smaller in relationship to the financi statement taken
as a whole regardless of fraud size examin of sourc document will be necessari
when an anomali is detect further investig is requir which will demand an
examin of sourc document
computerassist analyt review
the comput can assist the auditor in determin the presenc of unusu pattern in the
acquisit or purchas function the comput can provid the auditor with a matrix of
the purchas activ to determin the presenc of unusu pattern an analysi of the
follow data might uncov purchas scheme such as
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1550 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud scheme detect method
fictiti vendor vendor and employe with match address
more than on vendor with the same address
vendor with onli post offic box address
overbil
unusu or onetim extra charg
conflict of interest vendor with employe who ar employe famili member
an unusu high occurr of complaint
complaint about specif vendor
higher price andor substandard qualiti
statist sampl
as with inventori the sourc document for purchas can be statist sampl and
examin for irregular statist sampl can be drawn to test specif attribut thi
detect method is particularli effect if a singl attribut is suspect such as fictiti
vendor a list of all post offic box address might reveal fictiti vendor
vendor or outsid complaint
fraudul scheme will often unravel becaus a vendor or other outsid complain to the
employ or compani complaint from custom vendor and other ar good detect
tool that can lead the fraud examin to further inquiri
site visit observ
a site visit will often reveal much about the intern control or lack thereof for ani
locat the observ of how the account transact ar actual transcrib will
sometim alert the fraud examin to potenti problem area
sampl audit program
the follow audit program mai be benefici in detect red flag to bill scheme
doe the compani have a purchas depart if ye is it independ of 1 the
account depart 2 the receiv depart or 3 the ship depart
ar purchas made onli after the respect depart head sign purchas
requisit
ar purchas made by mean of purchas order sent to vendor for all purchas or
onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price term deliveri
requir and date
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1551
is a list of unfil purchas order maintain and review period
ar purchas order form prenumb and is the sequenc account for period
doe the client maintain an approv vendor list
ar item purchas onli after competit bid ar obtain if so ar competit bid
obtain for all purchas or onli for purchas over a predetermin dollar limit
is a log maintain of all receipt
doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv if ye
ar receiv report 1 prepar for all item 2 prepar onli for item that have
purchas order or 3 renumb
at the time the item ar receiv doe someon independ of the purchas
depart check the merchandis befor accept as to descript quantiti
and condit
ar copi of receiv report 1 furnish to the account depart 2 furnish
to the purchas depart or 3 file in the receiv depart
ar receipt under blanket purchas order monitor and ar quantiti exceed
author total return to the vendor
ar procedur adequ for the proper account for partial deliveri of
purchas order
ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat
liabil is record
ar invoic check as to price extens foot freight charg allow and
credit term
ar control adequ to ensur that all avail discount ar taken
ar purchas record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process
through cash disburs
doe a respons employe assign the appropri gener ledger account distribut
to which the invoic ar to be post
ar procedur adequ to ensur that invoic have been process befor payment
and to prevent duplic payment eg a block stamp
doe a respons offici approv invoic for payment
ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to
custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and
a payabl
ar record of good return to vendor match to vendor credit memo
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1552 2011 fraud examin manual
ar unmatch receiv report purchas order and vendor invoic period
review and investig for proper record
is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
ar statement from vendor regularli review and reconcil against record
liabil
do adjust to account payabl eg write off of debit balanc requir the
approv of a design offici
ar budget us if ye ar bu dget approv by respons offici and ar actual
expenditur compar with budget amount and varianc analyz and explain
if excess inventori purchas is suspect verifi that all inventori purchas wa
receiv receiv report at the proper locat an examin of receiv report or
invoic might reveal altern ship site
prevent of bill scheme
the prevent of purchas fraud can be especi difficult purchas personnel ar
often held to a differ standard than other employe of a compani for exampl sale
peopl often ar given induc or perquisit in order to persuad potenti custom
these same induc ar offer to the purchas personnel of the compani from the
compani vendor and yet the compani ex pect the purchas personnel to perform
their function without bia and to make decis that ar in the best interest of the
compani without regard to the induc offer by supplier addition the
personnel involv in the purchas and payment function ar gener not compens
on a basi commensur with their perform as ar salespeopl therefor there is a
revers incent to perform in the best interest of the compani
probabl the most effect purchas fraud prevent measur is educ train of
the purchas and payabl personnel the second most effect purchas fraud
prevent measur is an object compens arrang with peopl respons for
purchas decis
educ train
purchas personnel should be train thoroughli in ethic situat the nation
associ of purchas manag ha a code of ethic for it certifi purchas
manag as a deterr to fraud compani might consid enrol and certif
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1553
compens
peopl respons for the purchas decis buyer should be paid well enough to
reduc the motiv and ration for fraud auditor can examin the compens of
purchas and determin if ani buyer were recent pass over for rais thi might be
an indic of discont that could lead to the format of a fraudul scheme against
the employ
proper document
proper document for purchas should includ prenumb and control purchas
requisit purchas order receiv report and check
proper approv
befor ad a vendor to the list there should be an investig of the propos
vendor perform by someon other than the personnel in purchas and account
payabl if a vendor number is requir befor payment is made and the personnel
respons for the investig assign the vendor that identif number then the
buyer cannot place fictiti vendor on the list larg or unusu purchas should be
approv by someon independ of the purchas depart
segreg of duti
for the best result and account each compani suffici in size should have a
separ purchas depart regardless of the compani size the purchas function
should be separ from the payment function
hotlin
compani should studi the feasibl of instal hotlin to provid a forum for
complaint by employe and outsid
competit bid
ensur that bid polici and procedur ar thoroughli review whenev possibl
enforc competit bid after the bid process ha been complet a questionnair
can be sent to success and unsuccess bidder thi questionnair can reveal area to not
onli make the bid process more effect but it also can provid a forum for bidder to
express concern over question or fraudul activ
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1554 2011 fraud examin manual
prevent checklist
the follow is a list of bill scheme prevent method that mai be help in the
deterr of bill fraud
author procedur of purchas order invoic and payment should be
document and adher to
the account payabl list of vendor should be period review for strang vendor
and address
payment code should be review for abnorm descript
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level on both a monthli and yearli
basi
purchas and inventori level should be compar and analyz see inventori and
other asset
control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number should be
in place
a separ of duti between author purchas receiv ship and
account should be in place
payment of voucher should be period review to ensur integr of proper
document
receiv and ship report should be review for complet and accuraci
asset inform should includ purchas trail and other inform
journal entri to inventori account should be strictli scrutin
appropri bank reconcili and review procedur should be perform
period check for outofplac vendor and endors
credit card statement should be review often for irregular
the valid of invoic with a post offic box address should be verifi
proper control for the receipt and handl of return to sender check should be
instal
