2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Billing Schemes/Personal Purchases Through False Invoicing


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Personal Purchases Through False Invoicing 
Employees who undertake purchases schemes may do so by running unsanctioned invoices 
through the accounts payable system. The perpetrator in this type of scheme buys an item 
and submits the bill to his employer as if it represented a legitimate company expense. The 
victim company ends up unknowingly buying goods or services for a dishonest employee. 
(See “Invoice Purchasing Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
THE FRAUDSTER AS AUTHORIZER OF INVOICES 
The person who engages in a purchases scheme is often the very person in the company 
whose duties include authorizing  purchases. Obviously, proper controls should preclude 
anyone from approving his own purchases. Such poorly separated functions leave little other 
than his conscience to dissuade an employee from fraud. Fraud arises in part because of a 
perceived opportunity. An employee who sees that no one is reviewing his actions is more 
likely to turn to fraud than one who knows his company works diligently to detect employee 
theft.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.543 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a remote location of a large, publicly traded company was authorized to 
order supplies and approve vend or invoices for payment. For over a year, the manager 
routinely added personal items and supplies for his own business to orders made on behalf 
of his employer. The orders often included a strange mix of items. For instance, technical 
supplies and home furnishings might be purchased in the same order. Because the manager 
was in a position to approve his own purcha ses, he could get away with such blatantly 
obvious frauds. In addition to ordering personal items, the perpetrator changed the delivery 
address for certain supplies so that they would be delivered directly to his home or side 
business. This scheme cost the victim comp any approximately $300,000 in unnecessary 
purchases.  
 
In some situations, the perpetrator is authorized to approve purchases, but controls prevent 
him from also initiating purchase requests. This procedure is supposed to prevent an 
employee from purchasing personal items with company funds. Unfortunately, those with 
authority to approve purchases often have a good deal of control over their subordinates. 
These persons can use their influence to force subordinates to assist in purchases schemes. 
In other cases, the manager might simply initiate the purchase order himself by forging the 
subordinate’s signature.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Purchases for under $1,000 at a certain utility company could be made with limited value 
purchase orders (LPOs), which required the signatures of two people: the originator of a 
purchase request and the approver of the request. An LPO attached to an invoice for less 
than $1,000 would be paid by the accounts payable department. In this case, a manager 
bought goods and services on company accounts, and prepared LPOs for the purchases. (In 
some cases, the LPO would falsely describe the item to conceal the natu re of the purchase.) 
Once the LPO was prepared, the manager forced a clerk in his department to sign the 
document as the originator of  the transaction. The clerk, in timidated by her boss, did not 
question the authenticity of the LPOs. With two signatures affixed, the LPO appeared to 
be legitimate and the bills were paid. The sche me cost the victim company at least $25,000. 
 
FALSE PURCHASE REQUISITIONS 
If an employee does not have purchasing authority, he may get approval for a fraudulent 
purchase by misrepresenting the nature of the acquisition. In many companies, those with 
the power to authorize purchases are not always attentive to their duties. If a trusted 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.544                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subordinate says that the company needs to buy a certain item or items, busy supervisors 
often give rubber stamp approval to the purchase requisition. Additionally, employees 
sometimes misrepresent the nature of the items they are purchasing in order to pass a 
cursory review by their superiors.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An engineer bought over $30,000 worth of personal items. The engineer dealt directly with 
vendors and was also in charge of overseeing the receipt of the materials he purchased. He 
was therefore able to misrepresent the nature of the merchandise he bought, listing it as 
“maintenance items.” Vendor invoices were altered to agree to this description.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.545 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.546                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the perpetrator falsifies his purchase requisition in this manner, the fraud should be 
detected when delivery occurs. For example, if the purchase requisition says “maintenance 
items” but the vendor delivers home furnishings, it will be obvious that the perpetrator has 
committed fraud. The problem of delivery can be avoided if the perpetrator is in charge of 
receiving incoming shipments. He can verify that delivery of “maintenance items” was 
received. This is a breach of separation of duties, but unfortunately, it is fairly common for 
purchasing agents to verify delivery of their own orders. Even if the victim organization 
enforces a centralized delivery point, the perpetrator might enlist the aid of an accomplice in 
the receiving department to falsify the organization’s receiving reports.  
 
Another way to avoid detection at the delivery stage is to change the delivery address for 
purchases. Instead of being shipped to the victim organization, the items that the employee 
buys are sent directly to his home or business. The perpetrator might also order the goods 
drop shipped to a remote location.  
 



:


person purchas through fals invoic
employe who undertak purchas scheme mai do so by run unsanct invoic
through the account payabl system the perpetr in thi type of scheme bui an item
and submit the bill to hi employ as if it repres a legitim compani expens the
victim compani end up unknowingli bui good or servic for a dishonest employe
see invoic purchas scheme flowchart
the fraudster as author of invoic
the person who engag in a purchas scheme is often the veri person in the compani
whose duti includ author purchas obvious proper control should preclud
anyon from approv hi own purchas such poorli separ function leav littl other
than hi conscienc to dissuad an employe from fraud fraud aris in part becaus of a
perceiv opportun an employe who see that no on is review hi action is more
like to turn to fraud than on who know hi compani work dilig to detect employe
theft
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1543
exampl
a manag of a remot locat of a larg publicli trade compani wa author to
order suppli and approv vend or invoic for payment for over a year the manag
routin ad person item and suppli for hi own busi to order made on behalf
of hi employ the order often includ a strang mix of item for instanc technic
suppli and home furnish might be purchas in the same order becaus the manag
wa in a posit to approv hi own purcha se he could get awai with such blatantli
obviou fraud in addit to order person item the perpetr chang the deliveri
address for certain suppli so that thei would be deliv directli to hi home or side
busi thi scheme cost the victim comp ani approxim 300000 in unnecessari
purchas
in some situat the perpetr is author to approv purchas but control prevent
him from also initi purchas request thi procedur is suppos to prevent an
employe from purchas person item with compani fund unfortun those with
author to approv purchas often have a good deal of control over their subordin
these person can us their influenc to forc subordin to assist in purchas scheme
in other case the manag might simpli initi the purchas order himself by forg the
subordin signatur
exampl
purchas for under 1000 at a certain util compani could be made with limit valu
purchas order lpo which requir the signatur of two peopl the origin of a
purchas request and the approv of the request an lpo attach to an invoic for less
than 1000 would be paid by the account payabl depart in thi case a manag
bought good and servic on compani account and prepar lpo for the purchas in
some case the lpo would fals describ the item to conceal the natu re of the purchas
onc the lpo wa prepar the manag forc a clerk in hi depart to sign the
document as the origin of the transact the clerk in timid by her boss did not
question the authent of the lpo with two signatur affix the lpo appear to
be legitim and the bill were paid the sche me cost the victim compani at least 25000
fals purchas requisit
if an employe doe not have purchas author he mai get approv for a fraudul
purchas by misrepres the natur of the acquisit in mani compani those with
the power to author purchas ar not alwai attent to their duti if a trust
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1544 2011 fraud examin manual
subordin sai that the compani need to bui a certain item or item busi supervisor
often give rubber stamp approv to the purchas requisit addition employe
sometim misrepres the natur of the item thei ar purchas in order to pass a
cursori review by their superior
exampl
an engin bought over 30000 worth of person item the engin dealt directli with
vendor and wa also in charg of overse the receipt of the materi he purchas he
wa therefor abl to misrepres the natur of the merchandis he bought list it as
mainten item vendor invoic were alter to agre to thi descript
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1545
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1546 2011 fraud examin manual
if the perpetr falsifi hi purchas requisit in thi manner the fraud should be
detect when deliveri occur for exampl if the purchas requisit sai mainten
item but the vendor deliv home furnish it will be obviou that the perpetr ha
commit fraud the problem of deliveri can be avoid if the perpetr is in charg of
receiv incom shipment he can verifi that deliveri of mainten item wa
receiv thi is a breach of separ of duti but unfortun it is fairli common for
purchas agent to verifi deliveri of their own order even if the victim organ
enforc a central deliveri point the perpetr might enlist the aid of an accomplic in
the receiv depart to falsifi the organ receiv report
anoth wai to avoid detect at the deliveri stage is to chang the deliveri address for
purchas instead of be ship to the victim organ the item that the employe
bui ar sent directli to hi home or busi the perpetr might also order the good
drop ship to a remot locat
