2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Payroll Fraud 
Payroll schemes are similar to billing schemes. The perpetrators of these frauds produce 
false documents, which cause the victim company to unknowingly make a fraudulent 
disbursement. In billing schemes, the false document is usually an invoice (coupled, perhaps, 
with false receiving reports, purchase orders, and purchase authorizations). In payroll 
schemes, the perpetrator typically falsifies a timecard or alters information in the payroll 
records. The major difference between payroll schemes and billing schemes is that payroll 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.555 
frauds involve disbursements to employees rather than to external parties. The most 
common payroll frauds are ghost employee schemes, falsified hours and salary schemes, and 
commission schemes.  
 
Ghost Employees 
The term ghost employee  refers to someone on the payroll who does not actually work for the 
victim company. Through the falsification of personnel or payroll records a fraudster causes 
paychecks to be generated to a ghost. The fraudster or an accomplice then converts these 
paychecks. (See “Ghost Employees” flowchart.) The ghost employee may be a fictitious 
person or a real individual who simply does not work for the victim employer. When the 
ghost is a real person, it is often a friend or relative of the perpetrator.  
 
In order for a ghost employee scheme to work, four things must happen: (1) the ghost must 
be added to the payroll, (2) timekeeping and wage rate information must be collected, (3) a 
paycheck must be issued to the ghost, and (4) the check must be delivered to the perpetrator 
or an accomplice.  
 
Adding the Ghost to the Payroll  
The first step in a ghost employee scheme is entering the ghost on the payroll. In some 
businesses, all hiring is done through a centralized personnel department, while in others the 
personnel function is spread over the managerial responsibilities of various departments. 
Regardless of how hiring of new employees is handled within a business, it is the person or 
persons with authority to add new employees and remove terminated employees that are in 
the best position to put ghosts on the payroll.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager who was responsible for hiring and scheduling janitorial work added over 80 
ghost employees to his payroll. The ghosts in this case were actual people who worked at 
other jobs for different companies. The manager filled out time sheets for the fictitious 
employees and authorized them, then took the resulting paychecks to the ghost employees, 
who cashed them and split the proceeds with the manager. It was this manager’s authority 
in the hiring and supervision of employees that enabled him to perpetrate this fraud.  
 
Employees in payroll accounting also sometimes create ghost employees. In a perfect world, 
every name listed on the payroll would be verified against personnel records to make sure 
that those persons receiving paychecks actually work for the company, but in practice this 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.556                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not always happen. Thus, persons in payroll accounting may be able to create fictitious 
employees by simply adding a new name to the payroll records. Access to these records is 
usually restricted, with only high-level employees having the ability to make changes to the 
payroll. These persons would therefore be among the most likely suspects in a ghost 
employee scheme. On the other hand, lower level employees sometimes gain access to 
restricted payroll information and should not be disregarded as possible suspects. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee in the payroll department was gi ven the authority to enter new employees into 
the payroll system, make corrections to payroll information, and distribute paychecks. This 
employee’s manager gave rubber-stamp approval to the employee’s actions because of a 
trusting relationship between the two. The lack of separation of duties and the absence of 
review made it simple for the culprit to add a fictitious employee into the payroll system.  
 
One way perpetrators try to conceal the presence of a ghost on the payroll is to create a 
ghost with a name very similar to that of a real employee. The name on the fraudulent 
paycheck, then, will appear to be legitimate to anyone who glances at it. For instance, if a 
victim organization has an employee named John Doe, the ghost may be named “John 
Doer.”   
 
Instead of adding new names to the payroll, some employees undertake ghost employee 
schemes when they fail to remove the names of terminated employees. Paychecks to the 
terminated employee continue to be generated even though the employee no longer works 
for the victim organization. The perpetrator intercepts these fraudulent paychecks and 
converts them to his own use.  
 
Collecting Timekeeping Information 
The second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issued to a ghost employee, 
at least in the case of hourly employees, is the collection and computation of timekeeping 
information. The perpetrator must provide payroll accounting with a timecard or other 
instrument showing how many hours the fictitious employee worked over the most recent 
pay period. This information, along with the wage rate information contained in personnel 
or payroll files, will be used to compute the amount of the fraudulent paycheck.  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.557 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.558                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Timekeeping records can be maintained in a variety of ways. Employees might manually 
record their hours on timecards or punch time clocks that record the time at which a person 
starts and finishes his work. In more sophisticated environments, computer systems can 
track an employee’s hours.  
 
When a ghost employee scheme is in place, someone must create documentation for the 
ghost’s hours. This essentially amounts to preparing a fake timecard showing when the ghost 
was allegedly present at work. Depending upon the normal procedure for recording hours, a 
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost’s name, punch the time 
clock for the ghost, and so on. The preparing of the timecard is not a great obstacle to the 
perpetrator. The real key is obtaining approval of the timecard.  
 
A supervisor should approve the timecards of hourly employees before paychecks are issued. 
This verifies to the payroll department that the employee actually worked the hours that are 
claimed on the card. A ghost employee, by definition, does not work for the victim 
organization, so approval will have to be fraudulently obtained. Often, the supervisor 
himself is the one who creates the ghost. When this is the case, the supervisor fills out a 
timecard in the name of the ghost, then affixes his own approval. The timecard is thereby 
authenticated and a paycheck will be issued. When a nonsupervisor is committing a ghost 
employee scheme, he will typically forge the necessary approval, then forward the bogus 
timecard directly to payroll accounting, bypassing his supervisor.  
 
In computerized systems, a supervisor’s signature might not be required. In lieu of this, the 
supervisor inputs data into the payroll system and the use of his password serves to 
authorize the entry. If an employee has access to the supervisor’s password, he can input 
data for the ghost, which will appear in the payroll system with a seal of approval.  
If the perpetrator creates ghosts who are salaried rather than hourly employees, it is not 
necessary to collect timekeeping information. Salaried employees are paid a certain amount 
each pay period regardless of how many hours they work. Because the timekeeping function 
can be avoided, it may be easier for a perpetrator to create a ghost employee who works on 
salary. However, most businesses have fewer salaried employees and they are more likely to 
be members of management. The salaried ghost may therefore be more difficult to conceal. 
 
Issuing the Ghost’s Paycheck 
Once a ghost is entered on the payroll and his timecard has been approved, the third step in 
the scheme is the actual issuance of the paycheck. The heart of a ghost employee scheme is 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.559 
in the falsification of payroll records and timekeeping information. Once this falsification 
has occurred, the perpetrator does not generally take an active role in the issuance of the 
check. The payroll department prints the check—based on the bogus information provided 
by the perpetrator—as it would any other paycheck.  
 
Delivery of the Paycheck  
The final step in a ghost employee scheme is the distribution of the checks to the 
perpetrator. Paychecks might be hand delivered to employees while at work, mailed to 
employees at their home addresses, or — most commonly now — directly deposited into the 
employees’ bank accounts. If employees are paid in currency rather than by check, the 
distribution is almost always conducted in-person and on-site. 
 
Ideally, those in charge of payroll distribution should not have a hand in any of the other 
functions of the payroll cycle. For instance, the person who enters new employees in the 
payroll system should not be allowed to distribute paychecks because this person can include 
a ghost on the payroll, then simply pocket the fraudulent check when paychecks are being 
disbursed. Obviously, when the perpetrator of a ghost employee scheme is allowed to mail 
checks to employees or pass them out at work, he is in a perfect position to ensure that the 
ghost’s check is delivered to himself.  
 
In most instances the perpetrator does not have the authority to distribute paychecks, and so 
must make sure that the victim organization sends the checks to a place where he can 
recover them. When checks are not distributed in the workplace, they are usually mailed to 
employees or deposited directly into those employees’ accounts.  
 
If the fictitious employee was added into the payroll or personnel records by the perpetrator, 
the problem of distribution is usually minor. When the ghost’s employment information is 
entered, the perpetrator simply lists an address or bank account to which the payments can 
be sent. In the case of purely fictitious ghost employees, the address is often the 
perpetrator’s own (the same goes for bank accounts). The fact that two employees (the 
perpetrator and the ghost) are receiving payments at the same destination may indicate 
payroll fraud. Some fraudsters avoid this duplication by having payments sent to a post 
office box or a separate bank account.  
 
Remember that a ghost employee is not always a fictitious person. It may, instead, be a real 
person who is conspiring with the perpetrator to defraud the company. For example, some 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.560                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees place their relatives or spouses on the company payroll. When real persons are 
falsely included on the payroll, the checks are sent to the homes or accounts of these 
persons.  
 
Distribution is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employee who was 
simply not removed from the payroll. If paychecks are distributed through the mail or by 
direct deposit, the perpetrator will have to enter the terminated employee’s records and 
change their delivery information. In companies where paychecks are distributed by hand or 
are held at a central location for employees to collect, the perpetrator can ignore the payroll 
records and simply pick up the fraudulent paychecks.  
 
Falsified Hours and Salary   
The most common method of misappropriating funds from the payroll is the overpayment 
of wages. For hourly employees, the size of a paycheck is based on two factors: the number 
of hours worked and the rate of pay. It is therefore obvious that for an hourly employee to 
fraudulently increase the size of his paycheck, he must either falsify the number of hours he 
has worked or change his wage rate. (See “Falsified Hours and Salary” flowchart.) Since 
salaried employees do not receive compensation based on their time at work, in most cases 
these employees generate fraudulent wages by increasing their rates of pay. 
 
When discussing payroll frauds that involve overstated hours, one must first understand how 
an employee’s time at work is recorded. Time is generally kept by one of three methods. 
Time clocks may be used to mark the time when an employee begins and finishes work. The 
employee inserts a card into the clock at the beginning and end of work, and the time is 
imprinted on that card. In more sophisticated systems, computers may track the time 
employees spend on the job based on log-in codes or a similar indicator. Finally, timecards 
showing the number of hours an employee worked on a particular day are often prepared 
manually by the employee and approved by his manager.  
 
Manually Prepared Timecards 
When hours are recorded manually, an employee typically fills out his timecard to reflect the 
number of hours he has worked, then presents it to his supervisor for approval. The 
supervisor verifies the accuracy of the timecard, signs the card to indicate his approval, then 
forwards it to the payroll department so that a paycheck can be issued.  
If an employee fills out his own timecard, it is easy to falsify the number of hours worked. 
He simply writes down false information, showing that he arrived at work earlier or left later 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.561 
than he actually did. The difficulty is not in falsifying the timecard, but in getting the 
fraudulent card approved by the employee’s supervisor. There are basically three ways for 
the employee to obtain the authorization he needs. 
 
FORGING A SUPERVISOR’S SIGNATURE  
When using this method, an employee typically withholds his timecard from those being sent 
to the supervisor for approval, forges the supervisor’s signature or initials, then adds the 
timecard to the stack of authorized cards, which are sent to the payroll department. The 
fraudulent timecard arrives at the payroll department with what appears to be a supervisor’s 
approval and a paycheck is subsequently issued.  
 
COLLUSION WITH A SUPERVISOR 
The second way to obtain approval of a fraudulent timecard is to collude with a supervisor 
who authorizes timekeeping information. In these schemes, a supervisor knowingly signs 
false timecards and the employee kicks back a portion of the overpaid wages to the 
supervisor. In some cases, the supervisor may take the entire amount of the overpayment. It 
may be particularly difficult to detect payroll fraud when a supervisor colludes with an 
employee, because managers are often relied upon as a control to ensure proper 
timekeeping.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A supervisor assigned employees to better work  areas or better jobs, but in return she 
demanded payment. The payment was arranged by the falsification of the employees’ 
timecards, which the supervisor  authorized. The employees we re compensated for fictitious 
overtime, which was kicked back to the supervisor.  
 
“RUBBER STAMP” SUPERVISORS 
The third way to obtain approval of fraudulent timecards is to rely on a supervisor to 
approve them without reviewing their accuracy. The “lazy manager” method seems risky and 
one would think that it would be uncommon, but the truth is that it occurs quite frequently. 
A recurring theme in occupational fraud schemes is the reliance of perpetrators on the 
inattentiveness of others. When an employee sees an opportunity to make a little extra 
money without getting caught, that employee is more likely to be emboldened to attempt a 
fraud scheme. The fact that a supervisor is known to “rubber stamp” timecards or even 
ignore them can be a factor in an employee’s decision to begin stealing from his company.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.562                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.563 
EXAMPLE 
A temporary employee noticed that his manager did not reconcile the expense journal 
monthly. Thus, the manager did not know ho w much was being paid  to the temporary 
agency. The fraudster completed fictitious time reports, which were sent to the temporary 
agency and which caused the victim company to pay over $30,000 in fraudulent wages. 
Since the fraudster controlled the mail and the manager did not review the expense journal, 
this extremely simple scheme went undetected for some time.  
 
POOR CUSTODY PROCEDURES 
One form of control breakdown that often occurs is the failure to maintain proper control 
over timecards. In a properly run system, timecards that have been authorized by 
management should be sent directly to payroll. Those who prepare the timecards should not 
have access to them after they have been approved. If this separation of duties is not 
observed, the person who prepared a timecard can alter it after his supervisor has approved 
the timecard but before it is delivered to payroll. For instance, the employee might fill out his 
timecard in erasable ink, obtain his supervisor’s signature on the timecard, and then change 
the hours reflected on the timecard so that he will be overcompensated.  
 
Another way hours are falsified is in the misreporting of leave time. This is not as common 
as timecard falsification, but it does occur with some frequency. Incidentally, this is the one 
instance in which salaried employees commit payroll fraud by falsifying their hours. A leave 
time scheme is very simple. An employee takes a certain amount of time off of work as paid 
leave or vacation, but does not report this leave time. Employees typically receive a certain 
amount of paid leave per year. If a person takes a leave of absence but does not report it, 
those days are not deducted from his allotted days off. In other words, he gets more leave 
time than he is entitled to. The result is that the employee shows up for work less, yet still 
receives the same pay.  
 
Time Clocks and Other Automated Timekeeping Systems 
In companies that use time clocks to collect timekeeping information, payroll fraud is usually 
uncomplicated. In the typical scenario, the time clock is located in an unrestricted area, and a 
timecard for each employee is kept nearby. The employees insert their timecards into the 
time clock at the beginning and end of their shifts and the clock imprints the time. The 
length of time an employee spends at work is thus recorded. Supervisors should be present 
at the beginning and end of shifts to ensure that employees do not punch the timecards of 
absent coworkers, but this simple control is often overlooked. Without proper supervision, 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.564                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees can punch the timecards of absent coworkers so that it appears the absent 
employee was at work that day. The absent employee is therefore overcompensated on his 
next paycheck. 
 
Rates of Pay 
It should be remembered that an employee can also receive a larger paycheck by changing 
his pay rate. An employee’s personnel or payr oll records reflect his rate of pay. If an 
employee can gain access to these records, or has an accomplice with access to them, he can 
adjust them so that he receives a larger paycheck.  
 
Commission Schemes 
Commission is a form of compensation calculated as a percentage of the amount of 
transactions a salesperson or other employee generates. It is a unique form of compensation 
that is not based on hours worked or a set yearly salary, but rather on an employee’s revenue 
output. A commissioned employee’s wages are based on two factors, the amount of sales he 
generates and the percentage of those sales he is paid. In other words, there are two ways an 
employee on commission can fraudulently increase his pay: (1) falsify the amount of sales 
made, or (2) increase his rate of commission. (See “Commission Schemes” flowchart.) 
 
Fictitious Sales 
Establishing unobtainable sales quotas that employees think are arbitrary will increase the 
pressure to establish fictitious performance levels. If the pressure becomes significant, the 
employee might resort to adding fictitious sales and accounts receivable to meet the sales 
quotas. 
 
An employee can falsify the amount of sales he has made in one of two ways, the first being 
the creation of fictitious sales. The manner in which fictitious sales are created depends on 
the industry in which the perpetrator operates. Fictitious sales might be constructed by the 
creation of fraudulent sales orders, purchase orders, credit authorizations, packing slips, 
invoices, and so on. On the other hand, a culprit might simply ring up a false sale on a cash 
register. The key is that a fictitious sale is created, that it appears to be legitimate, and that 
the victim organization reacts by issuing a commission check to the perpetrator.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.565 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.566                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE  
An unscrupulous insurance agent took advant age of his company’s incentive commissions, 
which paid $1.25 for every $1.00 of premiums generated in the first year of a policy. The 
agent wrote policies to fictitious customers, paid the premiums, and received his 
commissions, which created an illicit profit on the transaction. For instance, if the fraudster 
paid $100,000 in premiums, he would receive $125,000 in commissions, a $25,000 
profit. No payments were made on the fr audulent policies after the first year.  
 
If a salesperson’s primary compensation is based on sales, without regard to collection, then 
there is an incentive to produce quantity rather than quality sales. It is natural for companies 
to push for higher sales levels to sustain growth. If the salespersons’ compensation is based 
solely on quantity and not on a combination of quantity and  quality, however, then the 
compensation incentive is misplaced. This might create an atmosphere which, if coupled 
with opportunity, will produce inflated or fictitious sales. 
 
Altered Sales  
The second way for a fraudster to overstate the amount of sales he has made is to alter the 
prices listed on sales documents. In other words, the perpetrator charges one price to a 
customer, but records a higher price in the company books. This causes the victim company 
to pay a larger commission than the perpetrator deserves. To make these schemes work, the 
employee might have to intercept and alter the invoices that are sent to the customer. (The 
invoices the company sends out will reflect a higher purchase price than the customer agreed 
to, so if the customer receives these invoices he is likely to complain about the discrepancy.) 
The employee may also overstate the revenue received from his customers.  
 
Altering Commission Rates 
As mentioned above, the other way to manipulate the commission process is to change the 
employee’s rate of commission. This would likely necessitate the alteration of payroll or 
personnel records, which should be off-limits to the sales staff.  
 
Detection of Payroll Schemes 
Independent Payroll Distribution 
Ghost employee schemes can be uncovered by having personnel (other than the payroll 
department) distribute the payroll checks or paystubs, and by requiring positive identification 
of the payee. However, as more and more companies are moving to a direct-deposit payroll 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.567 
with pay stubs available for viewing online, hand-delivering paychecks or paystubs is 
becoming an obsolete method of detecting ghost employees.  
 
Analysis of Payee Address or Accounts 
If payroll checks are either mailed or deposited automatically, then a list of duplicate 
addresses or deposit accounts may reveal ghost employees or duplicate payments. 
 
Duplicate Identification Numbers 
Because each employee is required to have a government-issued identification number (such 
as a Social Security or Social Insurance number), a listing of duplicate numbers may reveal 
ghost employees. 
 
Overtime Authorization 
Requiring employees to have overtime authorized by a supervisor, having the supervisor be 
responsible for the timecards, and having the supervisor refer the timecards directly to 
payroll will aid in reducing overtime abuses. In addition, the payroll department should scan 
the time reports and question obvious abuses such as only one employee working overtime 
in a department or excessive overtime on a timecard. By examining the source 
documentation, one may detect unauthorized overtime and falsified hours abuses. 
 
Commissions 
Commission schemes can often be detected with the following techniques: 
• Compare commission expenses to sales figures to verify linear correlation. 
• Prepare a comparative analysis of commission earned by salesperson, verifying rates and 
calculation accuracy. Inordinately high earnings by an individual could signal fraud. 
• Analyze sales by salesperson for uncollected sales amounts. 
• Determine proper segregation of duties in calculation of commission amounts. 
Commissions should be independently provided by personnel outside the sales 
department. 
• Contact a random sample of customers to confirm sales.  
 
TREND ANALYSIS ON WRITTEN-OFF ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE 
Stratify the written-off accounts receivable data and examine it for possible trends and 
patterns. For example, do any of the following trends appear? 
• Same salesperson 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.568                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Same accounting period (unless only an annual review of accounts receivable is 
performed) 
• Same collector 
• Collection rates by agency or collector 
 
Any of these trends might indicate fictitious accounts receivable, or that only new or good 
accounts are being assigned to collectors or collection agencies. 
 
Analysis of Deductions from Payroll Checks 
An analysis of the payroll withholdings may reveal either ghost employees or trust account 
abuses. Ghost employees will often have no withholding taxes, insurance, or other normal 
deductions. Therefore, a listing of any employee without these items may reveal a ghost 
employee. 
 
An analysis of withholding-tax deposits may reveal that trust account taxes have been 
“borrowed,” even for a short period, before the taxes are deposited. Comparing the 
disbursement date with the deposit date should reveal if the trust account taxes have been 
borrowed. Additionally, any delinquent payroll tax notices from the taxing authorities should 
serve as a red flag to potential trust account tax “borrowings.” 
 
Other Detection Methods 
Other methods for detecting ghost employees include:  
• Reviewing company e-mail address directories to ensure that all employees receiving 
paychecks have a company e-mail address issued by the IT Department 
• Comparing employee names, addresses, and social security numbers, as well as direct-
 deposit bank account numbers to determine if there are any unexpected duplicates 
• Comparing employee payroll records to human resources employee files to ensure social 
security numbers and names match 
• Examining payroll checks for dual endorsements 
 
Prevention of Payroll Schemes 
There are two basic preventive measures for payroll-related fraud: segregation of duties and 
periodic payroll review and analysis. 
 
Segregation of Duties 
The following duties should be segregated:  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.569 
• Payroll preparation 
• Payroll disbursement (into payroll and withholding tax accounts) 
• Payroll distribution  
• Payroll bank reconciliations 
• Human resource departmental functions 
 
If payroll is prepared by personnel not responsible for its distribution and reconciliation, it 
will be difficult for anyone to successfully add ghost employees. They will also be prevented 
from “borrowing” the trust account taxes because  they will not have access to the disbursing 
function. In smaller companies, this function is often handled outside the firm at pennies  
per employee. 
 
After the payroll checks are prepared, the transfer of funds from the general accounts to the 
payroll accounts should be handled by accounting. The personnel department should 
distribute checks and require identification in exchange for the payroll checks. This will 
curtail the opportunity to add ghost employees to the payroll. A suggested form of 
identification might be company-issued access passes, if available. 
 
If the bank reconciliation function for the payroll account is assigned to someone other than 
those in the above described functions, then all the payroll functions have been segregated. 
No one is able to add ghost employees or “borrow” the withholding taxes without the 
opportunity for discovery by someone else. 
 
Periodic Review and Analysis of Payroll 
Periodically, an independent review of the payroll might reveal that internal controls are not 
working as designed. Comparing deposit dates with dates of payroll disbursement or transfer 
may reveal ghost employees. An occasional independent payroll distribution may reveal 
ghost employees. 
 
The existence of the following may indicate the presence of ghost employees: 
• More than one employee with the same address. 
• More than one employee with the same government identification number. 
• More than one employee with the same account number (automatic deposit). 
• Employees with no withholding. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.570                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Indicators of Payroll Fraud 
In addition, the following audit program will help spot red flags to payroll distribution fraud 
and help with installing control procedures: 
• Are personnel records maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions? 
• Is the payroll accounting function independent of the general ledger function? 
• Are changes to payroll not made unless the personnel department sends approved 
notification directly to the payroll department? 
• Are references and backgrounds checked for new hires? 
• Are all wage rates authorized in writing by a designated official? 
• Are signed authorizations on file for employees whose wages are subject to special 
deductions? 
• Are bonuses, commissions, and overtime approved in advance and reviewed for 
compliance with company policies? 
• Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays reviewed for compliance with company policy? 
• Are appropriate forms completed and signed by employees to show authorization for 
payroll deductions and withholding exemptions? 
• Is the payroll periodically checked against the personnel records for terminated 
employees, fictitious employees, etc.? 
• Is a time clock used for office employees as well as factory workers? 
• If a time clock is used, are timecards (1) punched by employees in the presence of a 
designated supervisor and (2) signed by a supervisor at the end of the payroll period? 
• Are timecards and production reports reviewed and compared with payroll distribution 
reports and production schedules? 
• Are payroll registers reviewed and approved before disbursements are made for (1) 
names of employees, (2) hours worked, (3) wage rates, (4) deductions, (5) agreement with 
payroll checks, and (6) unusual items? 
• Are all employees paid by check out of a separate bank payroll account? 
• Are payroll checks prenumbered and issued in numerical sequence? 
• Is access restricted to unissued payroll checks and signature plates? 
• Are checks drawn and signed by designated officials who do not (1) prepare payroll, (2) 
have access to the accounting records, or (3) have custody of cash funds? 
• Are payroll checks distributed by someone other than the department head or the person 
who prepares the payroll? 
• Is the distribution of the payroll rotated periodically to different employees without 
 prior notice? 
• Is the payroll bank account reconciled by a designated employee who (1) is not involved 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.571 
in the preparing of payroll, (2) does not sign the checks, or (3) does not handle the check 
distributions? 
• Do payroll bank account reconciliation procedures include comparing the paid checks to 
the payroll, and scrutinizing canceled check endorsements? 
• Are the payroll registers reconciled to the general ledger control accounts? 
• Is a liability account set up for all wages that have remained unclaimed for a certain 
period of time? If yes, (1) have these wages been redeposited in a special bank account, 
and (2) is identification required to be presented at the time of their subsequent 
distribution?  
• Are distributions of hours (direct and indirect) to activity or departments reviewed and 
approved by supervisory personnel?  
• Are actual payroll amounts reviewed and compared to budgeted amounts, and are 
variances analyzed regularly?  
• Do adequate procedures exist for timely and accurate preparation and filing of payroll 
tax returns and related taxes?  
• Are employee benefit plan contributions reconciled to appropriate employee  
census data?  
• Are adequate, detailed records maintained of the entity’s liability for vacation pay and 
sick pay? Are they reconciled to the general ledger control accounts periodically?  
 
 



:


payrol fraud
payrol scheme ar similar to bill scheme the perpetr of these fraud produc
fals document which caus the victim compani to unknowingli make a fraudul
disburs in bill scheme the fals document is usual an invoic coupl perhap
with fals receiv report purchas order and purchas author in payrol
scheme the perpetr typic falsifi a timecard or alter inform in the payrol
record the major differ between payrol scheme and bill scheme is that payrol
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1555
fraud involv disburs to employe rather than to extern parti the most
common payrol fraud ar ghost employe scheme falsifi hour and salari scheme and
commiss scheme
ghost employe
the term ghost employe refer to someon on the payrol who doe not actual work for the
victim compani through the falsif of personnel or payrol record a fraudster caus
paycheck to be gener to a ghost the fraudster or an accomplic then convert these
paycheck see ghost employe flowchart the ghost employe mai be a fictiti
person or a real individu who simpli doe not work for the victim employ when the
ghost is a real person it is often a friend or rel of the perpetr
in order for a ghost employe scheme to work four thing must happen 1 the ghost must
be ad to the payrol 2 timekeep and wage rate inform must be collect 3 a
paycheck must be issu to the ghost and 4 the check must be deliv to the perpetr
or an accomplic
ad the ghost to the payrol
the first step in a ghost employe scheme is enter the ghost on the payrol in some
busi all hire is done through a central personnel depart while in other the
personnel function is spread over the manageri respons of variou depart
regardless of how hire of new employe is handl within a busi it is the person or
person with author to add new employe and remov termin employe that ar in
the best posit to put ghost on the payrol
exampl
a manag who wa respons for hire and schedul janitori work ad over 80
ghost employe to hi payrol the ghost in thi case were actual peopl who work at
other job for differ compani the manag fill out time sheet for the fictiti
employe and author them then took the result paycheck to the ghost employe
who cash them and split the proce with the manag it wa thi manag author
in the hire and supervis of employe that enabl him to perpetr thi fraud
employe in payrol account also sometim creat ghost employe in a perfect world
everi name list on the payrol would be verifi against personnel record to make sure
that those person receiv paycheck actual work for the compani but in practic thi
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1556 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not alwai happen thu person in payrol account mai be abl to creat fictiti
employe by simpli ad a new name to the payrol record access to these record is
usual restrict with onli highlevel employe have the abil to make chang to the
payrol these person would therefor be among the most like suspect in a ghost
employe scheme on the other hand lower level employe sometim gain access to
restrict payrol inform and should not be disregard as possibl suspect
exampl
an employe in the payrol depart wa gi ven the author to enter new employe into
the payrol system make correct to payrol inform and distribut paycheck thi
employe manag gave rubberstamp approv to the employe action becaus of a
trust relationship between the two the lack of separ of duti and the absenc of
review made it simpl for the culprit to add a fictiti employe into the payrol system
on wai perpetr try to conceal the presenc of a ghost on the payrol is to creat a
ghost with a name veri similar to that of a real employe the name on the fraudul
paycheck then will appear to be legitim to anyon who glanc at it for instanc if a
victim organ ha an employe name john doe the ghost mai be name john
doer
instead of ad new name to the payrol some employe undertak ghost employe
scheme when thei fail to remov the name of termin employe paycheck to the
termin employe continu to be gener even though the employe no longer work
for the victim organ the perpetr intercept these fraudul paycheck and
convert them to hi own us
collect timekeep inform
the second thing that must occur in order for a paycheck to be issu to a ghost employe
at least in the case of hourli employe is the collect and comput of timekeep
inform the perpetr must provid payrol account with a timecard or other
instrument show how mani hour the fictiti employe work over the most recent
pai period thi inform along with the wage rate inform contain in personnel
or payrol file will be us to comput the amount of the fraudul paycheck
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1557
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1558 2011 fraud examin manual
timekeep record can be maintain in a varieti of wai employe might manual
record their hour on timecard or punch time clock that record the time at which a person
start and finish hi work in more sophist environ comput system can
track an employe hour
when a ghost employe scheme is in place someon must creat document for the
ghost hour thi essenti amount to prepar a fake timecard show when the ghost
wa allegedli present at work depend upon the normal procedur for record hour a
fraudster might write up a fake timecard and sign it in the ghost name punch the time
clock for the ghost and so on the prepar of the timecard is not a great obstacl to the
perpetr the real kei is obtain approv of the timecard
a supervisor should approv the timecard of hourli employe befor paycheck ar issu
thi verifi to the payrol depart that the employe actual work the hour that ar
claim on the card a ghost employe by definit doe not work for the victim
organ so approv will have to be fraudul obtain often the supervisor
himself is the on who creat the ghost when thi is the case the supervisor fill out a
timecard in the name of the ghost then affix hi own approv the timecard is therebi
authent and a paycheck will be issu when a nonsupervisor is commit a ghost
employe scheme he will typic forg the necessari approv then forward the bogu
timecard directli to payrol account bypass hi supervisor
in computer system a supervisor signatur might not be requir in lieu of thi the
supervisor input data into the payrol system and the us of hi password serv to
author the entri if an employe ha access to the supervisor password he can input
data for the ghost which will appear in the payrol system with a seal of approv
if the perpetr creat ghost who ar salari rather than hourli employe it is not
necessari to collect timekeep inform salari employe ar paid a certain amount
each pai period regardless of how mani hour thei work becaus the timekeep function
can be avoid it mai be easier for a perpetr to creat a ghost employe who work on
salari howev most busi have fewer salari employe and thei ar more like to
be member of manag the salari ghost mai therefor be more difficult to conceal
issu the ghost paycheck
onc a ghost is enter on the payrol and hi timecard ha been approv the third step in
the scheme is the actual issuanc of the paycheck the heart of a ghost employe scheme is
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1559
in the falsif of payrol record and timekeep inform onc thi falsif
ha occur the perpetr doe not gener take an activ role in the issuanc of the
check the payrol depart print the checkbas on the bogu inform provid
by the perpetratora it would ani other paycheck
deliveri of the paycheck
the final step in a ghost employe scheme is the distribut of the check to the
perpetr paycheck might be hand deliv to employe while at work mail to
employe at their home address or most commonli now directli deposit into the
employe bank account if employe ar paid in currenc rather than by check the
distribut is almost alwai conduct inperson and onsit
ideal those in charg of payrol distribut should not have a hand in ani of the other
function of the payrol cycl for instanc the person who enter new employe in the
payrol system should not be allow to distribut paycheck becaus thi person can includ
a ghost on the payrol then simpli pocket the fraudul check when paycheck ar be
disburs obvious when the perpetr of a ghost employe scheme is allow to mail
check to employe or pass them out at work he is in a perfect posit to ensur that the
ghost check is deliv to himself
in most instanc the perpetr doe not have the author to distribut paycheck and so
must make sure that the victim organ send the check to a place where he can
recov them when check ar not distribut in the workplac thei ar usual mail to
employe or deposit directli into those employe account
if the fictiti employe wa ad into the payrol or personnel record by the perpetr
the problem of distribut is usual minor when the ghost employ inform is
enter the perpetr simpli list an address or bank account to which the payment can
be sent in the case of pure fictiti ghost employe the address is often the
perpetr own the same goe for bank account the fact that two employe the
perpetr and the ghost ar receiv payment at the same destin mai indic
payrol fraud some fraudster avoid thi duplic by have payment sent to a post
offic box or a separ bank account
rememb that a ghost employe is not alwai a fictiti person it mai instead be a real
person who is conspir with the perpetr to defraud the compani for exampl some
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1560 2011 fraud examin manual
employe place their rel or spous on the compani payrol when real person ar
fals includ on the payrol the check ar sent to the home or account of these
person
distribut is a more difficult problem when the ghost is a former employe who wa
simpli not remov from the payrol if paycheck ar distribut through the mail or by
direct deposit the perpetr will have to enter the termin employe record and
chang their deliveri inform in compani where paycheck ar distribut by hand or
ar held at a central locat for employe to collect the perpetr can ignor the payrol
record and simpli pick up the fraudul paycheck
falsifi hour and salari
the most common method of misappropri fund from the payrol is the overpay
of wage for hourli employe the size of a paycheck is base on two factor the number
of hour work and the rate of pai it is therefor obviou that for an hourli employe to
fraudul increas the size of hi paycheck he must either falsifi the number of hour he
ha work or chang hi wage rate see falsifi hour and salari flowchart sinc
salari employe do not receiv compens base on their time at work in most case
these employe gener fraudul wage by increas their rate of pai
when discuss payrol fraud that involv overst hour on must first understand how
an employe time at work is record time is gener kept by on of three method
time clock mai be us to mark the time when an employe begin and finish work the
employe insert a card into the clock at the begin and end of work and the time is
imprint on that card in more sophist system comput mai track the time
employe spend on the job base on login code or a similar indic final timecard
show the number of hour an employe work on a particular dai ar often prepar
manual by the employe and approv by hi manag
manual prepar timecard
when hour ar record manual an employe typic fill out hi timecard to reflect the
number of hour he ha work then present it to hi supervisor for approv the
supervisor verifi the accuraci of the timecard sign the card to indic hi approv then
forward it to the payrol depart so that a paycheck can be issu
if an employe fill out hi own timecard it is easi to falsifi the number of hour work
he simpli write down fals inform show that he arriv at work earlier or left later
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1561
than he actual did the difficulti is not in falsifi the timecard but in get the
fraudul card approv by the employe supervisor there ar basic three wai for
the employe to obtain the author he need
forg a supervisor signatur
when us thi method an employe typic withhold hi timecard from those be sent
to the supervisor for approv forg the supervisor signatur or initi then add the
timecard to the stack of author card which ar sent to the payrol depart the
fraudul timecard arriv at the payrol depart with what appear to be a supervisor
approv and a paycheck is subsequ issu
collus with a supervisor
the second wai to obtain approv of a fraudul timecard is to collud with a supervisor
who author timekeep inform in these scheme a supervisor knowingli sign
fals timecard and the employe kick back a portion of the overpaid wage to the
supervisor in some case the supervisor mai take the entir amount of the overpay it
mai be particularli difficult to detect payrol fraud when a supervisor collud with an
employe becaus manag ar often reli upon as a control to ensur proper
timekeep
exampl
a supervisor assign employe to better work area or better job but in return she
demand payment the payment wa arrang by the falsif of the employe
timecard which the supervisor author the employe we re compens for fictiti
overtim which wa kick back to the supervisor
rubber stamp supervisor
the third wai to obtain approv of fraudul timecard is to reli on a supervisor to
approv them without review their accuraci the lazi manag method seem riski and
on would think that it would be uncommon but the truth is that it occur quit frequent
a recur theme in occup fraud scheme is the relianc of perpetr on the
inattent of other when an employe see an opportun to make a littl extra
monei without get caught that employe is more like to be embolden to attempt a
fraud scheme the fact that a supervisor is known to rubber stamp timecard or even
ignor them can be a factor in an employe decis to begin steal from hi compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1562 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1563
exampl
a temporari employe notic that hi manag did not reconcil the expens journal
monthli thu the manag did not know ho w much wa be paid to the temporari
agenc the fraudster complet fictiti time report which were sent to the temporari
agenc and which caus the victim compani to pai over 30000 in fraudul wage
sinc the fraudster control the mail and the manag did not review the expens journal
thi extrem simpl scheme went undetect for some time
poor custodi procedur
on form of control breakdown that often occur is the failur to maintain proper control
over timecard in a properli run system timecard that have been author by
manag should be sent directli to payrol those who prepar the timecard should not
have access to them after thei have been approv if thi separ of duti is not
observ the person who prepar a timecard can alter it after hi supervisor ha approv
the timecard but befor it is deliv to payrol for instanc the employe might fill out hi
timecard in eras ink obtain hi supervisor signatur on the timecard and then chang
the hour reflect on the timecard so that he will be overcompens
anoth wai hour ar falsifi is in the misreport of leav time thi is not as common
as timecard falsif but it doe occur with some frequenc incident thi is the on
instanc in which salari employe commit payrol fraud by falsifi their hour a leav
time scheme is veri simpl an employe take a certain amount of time off of work as paid
leav or vacat but doe not report thi leav time employe typic receiv a certain
amount of paid leav per year if a person take a leav of absenc but doe not report it
those dai ar not deduct from hi allot dai off in other word he get more leav
time than he is entitl to the result is that the employe show up for work less yet still
receiv the same pai
time clock and other autom timekeep system
in compani that us time clock to collect timekeep inform payrol fraud is usual
uncompl in the typic scenario the time clock is locat in an unrestrict area and a
timecard for each employe is kept nearbi the employe insert their timecard into the
time clock at the begin and end of their shift and the clock imprint the time the
length of time an employe spend at work is thu record supervisor should be present
at the begin and end of shift to ensur that employe do not punch the timecard of
absent cowork but thi simpl control is often overlook without proper supervis
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1564 2011 fraud examin manual
employe can punch the timecard of absent cowork so that it appear the absent
employe wa at work that dai the absent employe is therefor overcompens on hi
next paycheck
rate of pai
it should be rememb that an employe can also receiv a larger paycheck by chang
hi pai rate an employe personnel or payr oll record reflect hi rate of pai if an
employe can gain access to these record or ha an accomplic with access to them he can
adjust them so that he receiv a larger paycheck
commiss scheme
commiss is a form of compens calcul as a percentag of the amount of
transact a salesperson or other employe gener it is a uniqu form of compens
that is not base on hour work or a set yearli salari but rather on an employe revenu
output a commiss employe wage ar base on two factor the amount of sale he
gener and the percentag of those sale he is paid in other word there ar two wai an
employe on commiss can fraudul increas hi pai 1 falsifi the amount of sale
made or 2 increas hi rate of commiss see commiss scheme flowchart
fictiti sale
establish unobtain sale quota that employe think ar arbitrari will increas the
pressur to establish fictiti perform level if the pressur becom signific the
employe might resort to ad fictiti sale and account receiv to meet the sale
quota
an employe can falsifi the amount of sale he ha made in on of two wai the first be
the creation of fictiti sale the manner in which fictiti sale ar creat depend on
the industri in which the perpetr oper fictiti sale might be construct by the
creation of fraudul sale order purchas order credit author pack slip
invoic and so on on the other hand a culprit might simpli ring up a fals sale on a cash
regist the kei is that a fictiti sale is creat that it appear to be legitim and that
the victim organ react by issu a commiss check to the perpetr
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1565
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1566 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an unscrupul insur agent took advant ag of hi compani incent commiss
which paid 125 for everi 100 of premium gener in the first year of a polici the
agent wrote polici to fictiti custom paid the premium and receiv hi
commiss which creat an illicit profit on the transact for instanc if the fraudster
paid 100000 in premium he would receiv 125000 in commiss a 25000
profit no payment were made on the fr audul polici after the first year
if a salesperson primari compens is base on sale without regard to collect then
there is an incent to produc quantiti rather than qualiti sale it is natur for compani
to push for higher sale level to sustain growth if the salesperson compens is base
sole on quantiti and not on a combin of quantiti and qualiti howev then the
compens incent is misplac thi might creat an atmospher which if coupl
with opportun will produc inflat or fictiti sale
alter sale
the second wai for a fraudster to overst the amount of sale he ha made is to alter the
price list on sale document in other word the perpetr charg on price to a
custom but record a higher price in the compani book thi caus the victim compani
to pai a larger commiss than the perpetr deserv to make these scheme work the
employe might have to intercept and alter the invoic that ar sent to the custom the
invoic the compani send out will reflect a higher purchas price than the custom agre
to so if the custom receiv these invoic he is like to complain about the discrep
the employe mai also overst the revenu receiv from hi custom
alter commiss rate
as mention abov the other wai to manipul the commiss process is to chang the
employe rate of commiss thi would like necessit the alter of payrol or
personnel record which should be offlimit to the sale staff
detect of payrol scheme
independ payrol distribut
ghost employe scheme can be uncov by have personnel other than the payrol
depart distribut the payrol check or paystub and by requir posit identif
of the paye howev as more and more compani ar move to a directdeposit payrol
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1567
with pai stub avail for view onlin handdeliv paycheck or paystub is
becom an obsolet method of detect ghost employe
analysi of paye address or account
if payrol check ar either mail or deposit automat then a list of duplic
address or deposit account mai reveal ghost employe or duplic payment
duplic identif number
becaus each employe is requir to have a governmentissu identif number such
as a social secur or social insur number a list of duplic number mai reveal
ghost employe
overtim author
requir employe to have overtim author by a supervisor have the supervisor be
respons for the timecard and have the supervisor refer the timecard directli to
payrol will aid in reduc overtim abus in addit the payrol depart should scan
the time report and question obviou abus such as onli on employe work overtim
in a depart or excess overtim on a timecard by examin the sourc
document on mai detect unauthor overtim and falsifi hour abus
commiss
commiss scheme can often be detect with the follow techniqu
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi linear correl
prepar a compar analysi of commiss earn by salesperson verifi rate and
calcul accuraci inordin high earn by an individu could signal fraud
analyz sale by salesperson for uncollect sale amount
determin proper segreg of duti in calcul of commiss amount
commiss should be independ provid by personnel outsid the sale
depart
contact a random sampl of custom to confirm sale
trend analysi on writtenoff account receiv
stratifi the writtenoff account receiv data and examin it for possibl trend and
pattern for exampl do ani of the follow trend appear
same salesperson
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1568 2011 fraud examin manual
same account period unless onli an annual review of account receiv is
perform
same collector
collect rate by agenc or collector
ani of these trend might indic fictiti account receiv or that onli new or good
account ar be assign to collector or collect agenc
analysi of deduct from payrol check
an analysi of the payrol withhold mai reveal either ghost employe or trust account
abus ghost employe will often have no withhold tax insur or other normal
deduct therefor a list of ani employe without these item mai reveal a ghost
employe
an analysi of withholdingtax deposit mai reveal that trust account tax have been
borrow even for a short period befor the tax ar deposit compar the
disburs date with the deposit date should reveal if the trust account tax have been
borrow addition ani delinqu payrol tax notic from the tax author should
serv as a red flag to potenti trust account tax borrow
other detect method
other method for detect ghost employe includ
review compani email address directori to ensur that all employe receiv
paycheck have a compani email address issu by the it depart
compar employe name address and social secur number as well as direct
deposit bank account number to determin if there ar ani unexpect duplic
compar employe payrol record to human resourc employe file to ensur social
secur number and name match
examin payrol check for dual endors
prevent of payrol scheme
there ar two basic prevent measur for payrollrel fraud segreg of duti and
period payrol review and analysi
segreg of duti
the follow duti should be segreg
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1569
payrol prepar
payrol disburs into payrol and withhold tax account
payrol distribut
payrol bank reconcili
human resourc department function
if payrol is prepar by personnel not respons for it distribut and reconcili it
will be difficult for anyon to successfulli add ghost employe thei will also be prevent
from borrow the trust account tax becaus thei will not have access to the disburs
function in smaller compani thi function is often handl outsid the firm at penni
per employe
after the payrol check ar prepar the transfer of fund from the gener account to the
payrol account should be handl by account the personnel depart should
distribut check and requir identif in exchang for the payrol check thi will
curtail the opportun to add ghost employe to the payrol a suggest form of
identif might be companyissu access pass if avail
if the bank reconcili function for the payrol account is assign to someon other than
those in the abov describ function then all the payrol function have been segreg
no on is abl to add ghost employe or borrow the withhold tax without the
opportun for discoveri by someon els
period review and analysi of payrol
period an independ review of the payrol might reveal that intern control ar not
work as design compar deposit date with date of payrol disburs or transfer
mai reveal ghost employe an occasion independ payrol distribut mai reveal
ghost employe
the exist of the follow mai indic the presenc of ghost employe
more than on employe with the same address
more than on employe with the same govern identif number
more than on employe with the same account number automat deposit
employe with no withhold
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1570 2011 fraud examin manual
indic of payrol fraud
in addit the follow audit program will help spot red flag to payrol distribut fraud
and help with instal control procedur
ar personnel record maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
is the payrol account function independ of the gener ledger function
ar chang to payrol not made unless the personnel depart send approv
notif directli to the payrol depart
ar refer and background check for new hire
ar all wage rate author in write by a design offici
ar sign author on file for employe whose wage ar subject to special
deduct
ar bonus commiss and overtim approv in advanc and review for
complianc with compani polici
ar sick leav vacat and holidai review for complianc with compani polici
ar appropri form complet and sign by employe to show author for
payrol deduct and withhold exempt
is the payrol period check against the personnel record for termin
employe fictiti employe etc
is a time clock us for offic employe as well as factori worker
if a time clock is us ar timecard 1 punch by employe in the presenc of a
design supervisor and 2 sign by a supervisor at the end of the payrol period
ar timecard and product report review and compar with payrol distribut
report and product schedul
ar payrol regist review and approv befor disburs ar made for 1
name of employe 2 hour work 3 wage rate 4 deduct 5 agreement with
payrol check and 6 unusu item
ar all employe paid by check out of a separ bank payrol account
ar payrol check prenumb and issu in numer sequenc
is access restrict to unissu payrol check and signatur plate
ar check drawn and sign by design offici who do not 1 prepar payrol 2
have access to the account record or 3 have custodi of cash fund
ar payrol check distribut by someon other than the depart head or the person
who prepar the payrol
is the distribut of the payrol rotat period to differ employe without
prior notic
is the payrol bank account reconcil by a design employe who 1 is not involv
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1571
in the prepar of payrol 2 doe not sign the check or 3 doe not handl the check
distribut
do payrol bank account reconcili procedur includ compar the paid check to
the payrol and scrutin cancel check endors
ar the payrol regist reconcil to the gener ledger control account
is a liabil account set up for all wage that have remain unclaim for a certain
period of time if ye 1 have these wage been redeposit in a special bank account
and 2 is identif requir to be present at the time of their subsequ
distribut
ar distribut of hour direct and indirect to activ or depart review and
approv by supervisori personnel
ar actual payrol amount review and compar to budget amount and ar
varianc analyz regularli
do adequ procedur exist for time and accur prepar and file of payrol
tax return and relat tax
ar employe benefit plan contribut reconcil to appropri employe
censu data
ar adequ detail record maintain of the entiti liabil for vacat pai and
sick pai ar thei reconcil to the gener ledger control account period
