2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Manually Prepared Timecards


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Manually Prepared Timecards 
When hours are recorded manually, an employee typically fills out his timecard to reflect the 
number of hours he has worked, then presents it to his supervisor for approval. The 
supervisor verifies the accuracy of the timecard, signs the card to indicate his approval, then 
forwards it to the payroll department so that a paycheck can be issued.  
If an employee fills out his own timecard, it is easy to falsify the number of hours worked. 
He simply writes down false information, showing that he arrived at work earlier or left later 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.561 
than he actually did. The difficulty is not in falsifying the timecard, but in getting the 
fraudulent card approved by the employee’s supervisor. There are basically three ways for 
the employee to obtain the authorization he needs. 
 
FORGING A SUPERVISOR’S SIGNATURE  
When using this method, an employee typically withholds his timecard from those being sent 
to the supervisor for approval, forges the supervisor’s signature or initials, then adds the 
timecard to the stack of authorized cards, which are sent to the payroll department. The 
fraudulent timecard arrives at the payroll department with what appears to be a supervisor’s 
approval and a paycheck is subsequently issued.  
 
COLLUSION WITH A SUPERVISOR 
The second way to obtain approval of a fraudulent timecard is to collude with a supervisor 
who authorizes timekeeping information. In these schemes, a supervisor knowingly signs 
false timecards and the employee kicks back a portion of the overpaid wages to the 
supervisor. In some cases, the supervisor may take the entire amount of the overpayment. It 
may be particularly difficult to detect payroll fraud when a supervisor colludes with an 
employee, because managers are often relied upon as a control to ensure proper 
timekeeping.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A supervisor assigned employees to better work  areas or better jobs, but in return she 
demanded payment. The payment was arranged by the falsification of the employees’ 
timecards, which the supervisor  authorized. The employees we re compensated for fictitious 
overtime, which was kicked back to the supervisor.  
 
“RUBBER STAMP” SUPERVISORS 
The third way to obtain approval of fraudulent timecards is to rely on a supervisor to 
approve them without reviewing their accuracy. The “lazy manager” method seems risky and 
one would think that it would be uncommon, but the truth is that it occurs quite frequently. 
A recurring theme in occupational fraud schemes is the reliance of perpetrators on the 
inattentiveness of others. When an employee sees an opportunity to make a little extra 
money without getting caught, that employee is more likely to be emboldened to attempt a 
fraud scheme. The fact that a supervisor is known to “rubber stamp” timecards or even 
ignore them can be a factor in an employee’s decision to begin stealing from his company.  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.562                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.563 
EXAMPLE 
A temporary employee noticed that his manager did not reconcile the expense journal 
monthly. Thus, the manager did not know ho w much was being paid  to the temporary 
agency. The fraudster completed fictitious time reports, which were sent to the temporary 
agency and which caused the victim company to pay over $30,000 in fraudulent wages. 
Since the fraudster controlled the mail and the manager did not review the expense journal, 
this extremely simple scheme went undetected for some time.  
 
POOR CUSTODY PROCEDURES 
One form of control breakdown that often occurs is the failure to maintain proper control 
over timecards. In a properly run system, timecards that have been authorized by 
management should be sent directly to payroll. Those who prepare the timecards should not 
have access to them after they have been approved. If this separation of duties is not 
observed, the person who prepared a timecard can alter it after his supervisor has approved 
the timecard but before it is delivered to payroll. For instance, the employee might fill out his 
timecard in erasable ink, obtain his supervisor’s signature on the timecard, and then change 
the hours reflected on the timecard so that he will be overcompensated.  
 
Another way hours are falsified is in the misreporting of leave time. This is not as common 
as timecard falsification, but it does occur with some frequency. Incidentally, this is the one 
instance in which salaried employees commit payroll fraud by falsifying their hours. A leave 
time scheme is very simple. An employee takes a certain amount of time off of work as paid 
leave or vacation, but does not report this leave time. Employees typically receive a certain 
amount of paid leave per year. If a person takes a leave of absence but does not report it, 
those days are not deducted from his allotted days off. In other words, he gets more leave 
time than he is entitled to. The result is that the employee shows up for work less, yet still 
receives the same pay.  
 



:


manual prepar timecard
when hour ar record manual an employe typic fill out hi timecard to reflect the
number of hour he ha work then present it to hi supervisor for approv the
supervisor verifi the accuraci of the timecard sign the card to indic hi approv then
forward it to the payrol depart so that a paycheck can be issu
if an employe fill out hi own timecard it is easi to falsifi the number of hour work
he simpli write down fals inform show that he arriv at work earlier or left later
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1561
than he actual did the difficulti is not in falsifi the timecard but in get the
fraudul card approv by the employe supervisor there ar basic three wai for
the employe to obtain the author he need
forg a supervisor signatur
when us thi method an employe typic withhold hi timecard from those be sent
to the supervisor for approv forg the supervisor signatur or initi then add the
timecard to the stack of author card which ar sent to the payrol depart the
fraudul timecard arriv at the payrol depart with what appear to be a supervisor
approv and a paycheck is subsequ issu
collus with a supervisor
the second wai to obtain approv of a fraudul timecard is to collud with a supervisor
who author timekeep inform in these scheme a supervisor knowingli sign
fals timecard and the employe kick back a portion of the overpaid wage to the
supervisor in some case the supervisor mai take the entir amount of the overpay it
mai be particularli difficult to detect payrol fraud when a supervisor collud with an
employe becaus manag ar often reli upon as a control to ensur proper
timekeep
exampl
a supervisor assign employe to better work area or better job but in return she
demand payment the payment wa arrang by the falsif of the employe
timecard which the supervisor author the employe we re compens for fictiti
overtim which wa kick back to the supervisor
rubber stamp supervisor
the third wai to obtain approv of fraudul timecard is to reli on a supervisor to
approv them without review their accuraci the lazi manag method seem riski and
on would think that it would be uncommon but the truth is that it occur quit frequent
a recur theme in occup fraud scheme is the relianc of perpetr on the
inattent of other when an employe see an opportun to make a littl extra
monei without get caught that employe is more like to be embolden to attempt a
fraud scheme the fact that a supervisor is known to rubber stamp timecard or even
ignor them can be a factor in an employe decis to begin steal from hi compani
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1562 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1563
exampl
a temporari employe notic that hi manag did not reconcil the expens journal
monthli thu the manag did not know ho w much wa be paid to the temporari
agenc the fraudster complet fictiti time report which were sent to the temporari
agenc and which caus the victim compani to pai over 30000 in fraudul wage
sinc the fraudster control the mail and the manag did not review the expens journal
thi extrem simpl scheme went undetect for some time
poor custodi procedur
on form of control breakdown that often occur is the failur to maintain proper control
over timecard in a properli run system timecard that have been author by
manag should be sent directli to payrol those who prepar the timecard should not
have access to them after thei have been approv if thi separ of duti is not
observ the person who prepar a timecard can alter it after hi supervisor ha approv
the timecard but befor it is deliv to payrol for instanc the employe might fill out hi
timecard in eras ink obtain hi supervisor signatur on the timecard and then chang
the hour reflect on the timecard so that he will be overcompens
anoth wai hour ar falsifi is in the misreport of leav time thi is not as common
as timecard falsif but it doe occur with some frequenc incident thi is the on
instanc in which salari employe commit payrol fraud by falsifi their hour a leav
time scheme is veri simpl an employe take a certain amount of time off of work as paid
leav or vacat but doe not report thi leav time employe typic receiv a certain
amount of paid leav per year if a person take a leav of absenc but doe not report it
those dai ar not deduct from hi allot dai off in other word he get more leav
time than he is entitl to the result is that the employe show up for work less yet still
receiv the same pai
