2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Payroll Fraud/Commissions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Commissions 
Commission schemes can often be detected with the following techniques: 
• Compare commission expenses to sales figures to verify linear correlation. 
• Prepare a comparative analysis of commission earned by salesperson, verifying rates and 
calculation accuracy. Inordinately high earnings by an individual could signal fraud. 
• Analyze sales by salesperson for uncollected sales amounts. 
• Determine proper segregation of duties in calculation of commission amounts. 
Commissions should be independently provided by personnel outside the sales 
department. 
• Contact a random sample of customers to confirm sales.  
 
TREND ANALYSIS ON WRITTEN-OFF ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE 
Stratify the written-off accounts receivable data and examine it for possible trends and 
patterns. For example, do any of the following trends appear? 
• Same salesperson 
  
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.568                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Same accounting period (unless only an annual review of accounts receivable is 
performed) 
• Same collector 
• Collection rates by agency or collector 
 
Any of these trends might indicate fictitious accounts receivable, or that only new or good 
accounts are being assigned to collectors or collection agencies. 
 



:


commiss
commiss scheme can often be detect with the follow techniqu
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi linear correl
prepar a compar analysi of commiss earn by salesperson verifi rate and
calcul accuraci inordin high earn by an individu could signal fraud
analyz sale by salesperson for uncollect sale amount
determin proper segreg of duti in calcul of commiss amount
commiss should be independ provid by personnel outsid the sale
depart
contact a random sampl of custom to confirm sale
trend analysi on writtenoff account receiv
stratifi the writtenoff account receiv data and examin it for possibl trend and
pattern for exampl do ani of the follow trend appear
same salesperson
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1568 2011 fraud examin manual
same account period unless onli an annual review of account receiv is
perform
same collector
collect rate by agenc or collector
ani of these trend might indic fictiti account receiv or that onli new or good
account ar be assign to collector or collect agenc
