2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: FRAUDULENT DISBURSEMENTS/Expense Reimbursement Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Fraudulent Disbursements


:


Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Employees can manipulate an organization’s expense reimbursement procedures to generate 
fraudulent disbursements. Expense reimbursements are usually paid by the company in the 
following manner. An employee submits a report detailing an expense incurred for a 
business purpose, such as a business lunch with a client, airfare, hotel bills associated with 
business travel, and so forth. In preparing an expense report, an employee is usually required 
to explain the business purpose for the expense, as well as the time, date, and location in 
which it was incurred. Support documentation for the expense, typically a receipt, should be 
attached to the report. In some cases canceled checks written by the employee or copies of a 
personal credit card statement showing the expense are allowed in lieu of receipts. The 
report must usually be authorized by a supervisor in order for the expense to be reimbursed. 
The four most common types of expense reimbursement schemes are mischaracterized 
expenses, overstated expenses, fictitious expenses, and multiple reimbursements.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.572                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Mischaracterized Expense Reimbursements 
Most companies only reimburse certain expenses of their employees. Which expenses a 
company will pay for depends to an extent upon policy, but in general, business-related 
travel, lodging, and meals are reimbursed. One of the most basic expense reimbursement 
schemes is perpetrated by simply requesting reimbursement for a personal expense by 
claiming that the expense is business-related. (See “Mischaracterized Expenses” flowchart.) 
Examples of mischaracterized expenses include claiming personal travel as a business trip, 
listing dinner with a friend as “business development,” and so on. Employees submit the 
receipts from their personal expenses along with their expense reports, but concoct business 
reasons for the incurred costs. The false expense report induces the victim organization to 
issue a check, reimbursing the perpetrator for his personal expenses.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.573 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.574                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In cases involving airfare and overnight travel, a mischaracterization can sometimes be 
detected by simply comparing the employee’s expense reports to his work schedule. Often, 
the dates of the so-called “business trip” coincide with a vacation or day off. Detailed 
expense reports allow a company to make this kind of comparison and are therefore very  
helpful in preventing expenses schemes.  
 
A common element to mischaracterized expense schemes is the failure to submit detailed 
expense reports, or any expense reports at all. Some companies allow employees to simply 
turn in receipts, without explaining the business purpose of the expenses reflected in the 
receipts. This makes it exceedingly easy for an employee to turn in, for example, a receipt 
from a restaurant and receive a check to reimburse him for a “business dinner.” Other 
companies provide employees with company credit cards and/or procurement cards and 
allow employees to spend company funds without providing detailed information justifying 
the purchase and sometimes not even requiring receipts. Requiring detailed information 
means more than just supporting documents; it should mean precise statements of what was 
purchased, as well as when, where, and for whom the purchase was made. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A fraudster submitted credit ca rd statements as support for expenses, but he only submitted 
the top portion of the statements, not the port ion that describes what  was purchased. Over 
95 percent of his expenses that were reimbur sed were of a personal rather than a business 
nature.  
 
Even when detailed expense reports are required, it may be difficult to detect a 
mischaracterized expense reimbursement scheme. For example, suppose a traveling salesman 
goes on a trip and runs up a large bar bill one night in his hotel, saves his receipt, and lists 
this expense as “business entertainment” on an expense report. Nothing about the time, 
date, or nature of the expense would readily point to fraud, and the receipt would appear to 
substantiate the expense. Short of contacting the client who was allegedly entertained, there 
may be little a victim organization can do to identify the expense as fraudulent.  
 
Overstated Expense Reimbursements 
Instead of seeking reimbursement for personal expenses, some employees overstate the cost 
of actual business expenses. (See “Overstated Expenses” flowchart.) This can be 
accomplished in a number of ways.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.575 
 
 
                Overstated Expenses 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.576                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Altered Receipts 
The most fundamental example of an overstated expense reimbursement scheme occurs 
when an employee doctors a receipt or other supporting documentation to reflect a higher 
cost than what he actually paid. The employee may use white-out, a ballpoint pen, or some 
other method to change the price reflected on the receipt before submitting his expense 
report. If the company does not require original documents as support, the perpetrator 
generally attaches a copy of the receipt to his expense report. Alterations are usually less 
noticeable on a photocopy than on an original document. For precisely this reason, 
businesses should require original receipts and ink signatures on expense reports. 
 
As with other expense frauds, overstated expense reimbursement schemes often succeed 
because of poor controls. In companies where supporting documents are not required, for 
example, fraudsters simply lie about how much they paid for a business expense. With no 
support available, it may be very difficult to disprove an employee’s false expense claims. 
 
Overpurchasing  
Another way to overstate a reimbursement form is the “overpurchasing” of business 
expenses. This method is typically used by employees seeking reimbursement for travel 
expenses. Assume an employee is scheduled to make a business trip to another city. The 
employee purchases an airline ticket far in advance of the trip when rates are low. When it is 
close to the day of the trip, the employee purchases another ticket to the same destination. 
This ticket will be more expensive than the first one. To further jack up the price, the second 
ticket might include several stops and layovers on a very circuitous route. The employee 
removes the passenger receipt coupon from the second ticket then returns it for a full 
refund. He actually flies on the first (less expensive) ticket he purchased, but attaches the 
receipt from the more expensive ticket to his expense report. 
 
Overstating Another Employee’s Expenses 
Overstated expense reimbursement schemes are not only committed by the person who 
actually incurs the expense. Sometimes, they may be committed by a coworker who handles 
or processes expense reports.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A petty cashier whited out other employees’ requests for travel advances and inserted larger 
amounts. The cashier then passed on the legitimate travel advances and pocketed the excess. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.577 
This kind of scheme is most likely to occur in a system where expenses are reimbursed in 
currency rather than by a check, since the perpetrator would be unable to extract his “cut” 
from a single check made out to another employee.  
 
Orders to Overstate Expenses  
Finally, some employees knowingly falsify their own reports, but do so at the direction of 
their supervisors. The employees may be threatened with loss of their jobs if they do not go 
along with the scheme. Sometimes the supervisor splits the proceeds of the fraud with his 
subordinates. In other cases, the excess money goes into a slush fund or is used for some 
other business purpose that is not in the company budget. The supervisors who engage in 
these schemes often believe they are really acting in the best interests of their companies.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A sales executive instructed his salesmen to inflate their expenses in order to generate cash 
for a slush fund. This fund was used to pay bribes and to provide improper forms of 
entertainment for clients and customers.  
 
Fictitious Expense Reimbursements  
Employees sometimes seek reimbursement for wholly fictitious expenses. Instead of 
overstating a real business expense or seeking reimbursement for a personal expense, an 
employee just invents an expense and requests that it be reimbursed. (See “Fictitious 
Expenses” flowchart.) 
 
Producing Fictitious Receipts  
One way to generate a reimbursement for a fictitious expense is to create bogus support 
documents, such as false receipts. The emergence of personal computers has enabled some 
employees to create realistic-looking counterfeit receipts at home. These counterfeits are 
often very sophisticated, even including the logos of the stores where goods or services were 
allegedly purchased. Computers are not the only means of creating support for a fictitious 
expense. Some employees use calculator tapes, others cut and paste old receipts from 
suppliers, and some even use professional printers to generate fictitious receipts.  
 
Unfortunately, not all companies require receipts to be attached to expense reports. Checks 
written by the employee or copies of his personal credit card bill might be allowed as 
support in lieu of a receipt. Some employees write personal checks that appear to be for 
business expenses, then photocopy these checks and attach them to reimbursement requests. 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.578                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In actuality, nothing is purchased with the checks; they are destroyed after the copies are 
made. The perpetrator ends up receiving a reimbursement from his employer without ever 
actually incurring a business expense. The same method can be used with credit cards, where 
a copy of a statement is used to support a purchase. Once the expense report is filed, the 
perpetrator returns the item and receives a credit to his account. 
 
Obtaining Blank Receipts from Vendors 
If the perpetrator does not create receipts, they can be obtained from legitimate suppliers in 
a number of ways. Some employees request blank receipts from waiters, bartenders, taxi cab 
drivers, etc. These persons fill in the blank receipts to “create” business expenses. A 
fraudster might also have a friend, spouse, relative, etc. who can provide receipts for 
“business expenses” that never really occur.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee’s girlfriend worked at a restaurant near the victim organization. This 
girlfriend validated credit card receipts and gave them to the fraudster so that he could 
submit them with his expense reports.  
 
In some cases a fraudster will steal an entire stack of blank receipts from a hotel, restaurant, 
etc., then fill them in and, over time, use them to verify fictitious business expenses.  
 
Claiming the Expenses of Others 
Another way perpetrators use actual receipts to generate unwarranted reimbursements is by 
submitting expense reports for expenses that were paid by others. For instance, an employee 
might save the receipt from a meal that was paid for by another party, then request 
reimbursement for the meal himself.  
 
Multiple Reimbursements 
The least common of the expense reimbursement schemes involves multiple 
reimbursements. This type of fraud involves the submission of a single expense more than 
one time. The most frequent example of a multiple reimbursement scheme is the submission 
of several types of support for the same expense.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements Financial Transactions   
1.580                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An employee would use, for example, an airline ticket stub  and a travel agency invoice on 
separate expense reports so that he could be reimbursed twice for the cost of a single flight. 
The fraudster would have his division president authorize one report and have the vice 
president approve the other so that neither would see both reports. Additionally, the 
perpetrator allowed a time lag of about a month between the filing of the two reports so that 
the duplication would be less noticeable. 
 
In cases where a company does not require original documents as support, some employees 
even use several copies of the same support document to generate multiple reimbursements. 
Rather than file two expense reports, employees may also charge an item to the company 
credit card, save the receipt, and attach it to an expense report as if they paid for the item 
themselves. The victim organization therefore ends up paying twice for the same expense.  
 
Detection of Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Detecting expense reimbursement fraud involves two basic methods. The first of these is a 
review and analysis of expense accounts. The second detection method is a detailed review 
of expense reports. 
 
Review and Analysis of Expense Accounts 
Generally, expense account review uses one of two methods: historical comparisons or 
comparisons with budgeted amounts. A historical comparison compares the balance 
expended this period in relation to the balance spent in prior, similar periods. When 
performing this review, consider changes to the marketing, servicing, or other company 
operations. 
 
Budgets are estimates of the money and/or time necessary to complete the task. They are 
based on past experience with consideration for current and future business conditions. 
Therefore, when comparing actual and budgeted expenses, determining inordinate expenses 
or inaccurate budget estimates is important. 
 
Detailed Review of Expense Reports 
Overall, the best detection method is a detailed review of employee expense reports. This 
method requires that the fraud examiner have, at the time of the examination, a calendar and 
a copy of the employee’s schedule for the relevant period. The examiner should be familiar 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.581 
with the travel and entertainment policies of the company. Additionally, the following two 
steps may help to detect and deter employee expense abuses: 
• Require employees to submit their expense reports for a detailed review before payment 
is reimbursed. If an employee knows that his expense report will be thoroughly 
reviewed, he will be less likely to include fraudulent expenses on the report.  
• Periodically audit travel and entertainment accounts. This is particularly effective shortly 
before employee performance reviews. 
 
Prevention of Expense Reimbursement Schemes 
Detailed Expense Reports: Submission and Review 
Detailed expense reports should require the following information: 
• Receipts or other support documentation 
• Explanation of the expense including specific business purpose 
• Time period expense occurred  
• Place of expenditure  
• Amount   
 
It is not enough to have the detailed reports submitted if they are not reviewed. A policy 
requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the appropriate 
detail, will help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for reimbursement. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappro priation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.601 



:


expens reimburs scheme
employe can manipul an organ expens reimburs procedur to gener
fraudul disburs expens reimburs ar usual paid by the compani in the
follow manner an employe submit a report detail an expens incur for a
busi purpos such as a busi lunch with a client airfar hotel bill associ with
busi travel and so forth in prepar an expens report an employe is usual requir
to explain the busi purpos for the expens as well as the time date and locat in
which it wa incur support document for the expens typic a receipt should be
attach to the report in some case cancel check written by the employe or copi of a
person credit card statement show the expens ar allow in lieu of receipt the
report must usual be author by a supervisor in order for the expens to be reimburs
the four most common type of expens reimburs scheme ar mischaracter
expens overst expens fictiti expens and multipl reimburs
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1572 2011 fraud examin manual
mischaracter expens reimburs
most compani onli reimburs certain expens of their employe which expens a
compani will pai for depend to an extent upon polici but in gener businessrel
travel lodg and meal ar reimburs on of the most basic expens reimburs
scheme is perpetr by simpli request reimburs for a person expens by
claim that the expens is businessrel see mischaracter expens flowchart
exampl of mischaracter expens includ claim person travel as a busi trip
list dinner with a friend as busi develop and so on employe submit the
receipt from their person expens along with their expens report but concoct busi
reason for the incur cost the fals expens report induc the victim organ to
issu a check reimburs the perpetr for hi person expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1573
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1574 2011 fraud examin manual
in case involv airfar and overnight travel a mischaracter can sometim be
detect by simpli compar the employe expens report to hi work schedul often
the date of the socal busi trip coincid with a vacat or dai off detail
expens report allow a compani to make thi kind of comparison and ar therefor veri
help in prevent expens scheme
a common element to mischaracter expens scheme is the failur to submit detail
expens report or ani expens report at all some compani allow employe to simpli
turn in receipt without explain the busi purpos of the expens reflect in the
receipt thi make it exceedingli easi for an employe to turn in for exampl a receipt
from a restaur and receiv a check to reimburs him for a busi dinner other
compani provid employe with compani credit card andor procur card and
allow employe to spend compani fund without provid detail inform justifi
the purchas and sometim not even requir receipt requir detail inform
mean more than just support document it should mean precis statement of what wa
purchas as well as when where and for whom the purchas wa made
exampl
a fraudster submit credit ca rd statement as support for expens but he onli submit
the top portion of the statement not the port ion that describ what wa purchas over
95 percent of hi expens that were reimbur sed were of a person rather than a busi
natur
even when detail expens report ar requir it mai be difficult to detect a
mischaracter expens reimburs scheme for exampl suppos a travel salesman
goe on a trip and run up a larg bar bill on night in hi hotel save hi receipt and list
thi expens as busi entertain on an expens report noth about the time
date or natur of the expens would readili point to fraud and the receipt would appear to
substanti the expens short of contact the client who wa allegedli entertain there
mai be littl a victim organ can do to identifi the expens as fraudul
overst expens reimburs
instead of seek reimburs for person expens some employe overst the cost
of actual busi expens see overst expens flowchart thi can be
accomplish in a number of wai
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1575
overst expens
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1576 2011 fraud examin manual
alter receipt
the most fundament exampl of an overst expens reimburs scheme occur
when an employe doctor a receipt or other support document to reflect a higher
cost than what he actual paid the employe mai us whiteout a ballpoint pen or some
other method to chang the price reflect on the receipt befor submit hi expens
report if the compani doe not requir origin document as support the perpetr
gener attach a copi of the receipt to hi expens report alter ar usual less
notic on a photocopi than on an origin document for precis thi reason
busi should requir origin receipt and ink signatur on expens report
as with other expens fraud overst expens reimburs scheme often succe
becaus of poor control in compani where support document ar not requir for
exampl fraudster simpli lie about how much thei paid for a busi expens with no
support avail it mai be veri difficult to disprov an employe fals expens claim
overpurchas
anoth wai to overst a reimburs form is the overpurchas of busi
expens thi method is typic us by employe seek reimburs for travel
expens assum an employe is schedul to make a busi trip to anoth citi the
employe purchas an airlin ticket far in advanc of the trip when rate ar low when it is
close to the dai of the trip the employe purchas anoth ticket to the same destin
thi ticket will be more expens than the first on to further jack up the price the second
ticket might includ sever stop and layov on a veri circuit rout the employe
remov the passeng receipt coupon from the second ticket then return it for a full
refund he actual fli on the first less expens ticket he purchas but attach the
receipt from the more expens ticket to hi expens report
overst anoth employe expens
overst expens reimburs scheme ar not onli commit by the person who
actual incur the expens sometim thei mai be commit by a cowork who handl
or process expens report
exampl
a petti cashier white out other employe request for travel advanc and insert larger
amount the cashier then pass on the legitim travel advanc and pocket the excess
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1577
thi kind of scheme is most like to occur in a system where expens ar reimburs in
currenc rather than by a check sinc the perpetr would be unabl to extract hi cut
from a singl check made out to anoth employe
order to overst expens
final some employe knowingli falsifi their own report but do so at the direct of
their supervisor the employe mai be threaten with loss of their job if thei do not go
along with the scheme sometim the supervisor split the proce of the fraud with hi
subordin in other case the excess monei goe into a slush fund or is us for some
other busi purpos that is not in the compani budget the supervisor who engag in
these scheme often believ thei ar realli act in the best interest of their compani
exampl
a sale execut instruct hi salesmen to inflat their expens in order to gener cash
for a slush fund thi fund wa us to pai bribe and to provid improp form of
entertain for client and custom
fictiti expens reimburs
employe sometim seek reimburs for wholli fictiti expens instead of
overst a real busi expens or seek reimburs for a person expens an
employe just invent an expens and request that it be reimburs see fictiti
expens flowchart
produc fictiti receipt
on wai to gener a reimburs for a fictiti expens is to creat bogu support
document such as fals receipt the emerg of person comput ha enabl some
employe to creat realisticlook counterfeit receipt at home these counterfeit ar
often veri sophist even includ the logo of the store where good or servic were
allegedli purchas comput ar not the onli mean of creat support for a fictiti
expens some employe us calcul tape other cut and past old receipt from
supplier and some even us profession printer to gener fictiti receipt
unfortun not all compani requir receipt to be attach to expens report check
written by the employe or copi of hi person credit card bill might be allow as
support in lieu of a receipt some employe write person check that appear to be for
busi expens then photocopi these check and attach them to reimburs request
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1578 2011 fraud examin manual
in actual noth is purchas with the check thei ar destroi after the copi ar
made the perpetr end up receiv a reimburs from hi employ without ever
actual incur a busi expens the same method can be us with credit card where
a copi of a statement is us to support a purchas onc the expens report is file the
perpetr return the item and receiv a credit to hi account
obtain blank receipt from vendor
if the perpetr doe not creat receipt thei can be obtain from legitim supplier in
a number of wai some employe request blank receipt from waiter bartend taxi cab
driver etc these person fill in the blank receipt to creat busi expens a
fraudster might also have a friend spous rel etc who can provid receipt for
busi expens that never realli occur
exampl
an employe girlfriend work at a restaur near the victim organ thi
girlfriend valid credit card receipt and gave them to the fraudster so that he could
submit them with hi expens report
in some case a fraudster will steal an entir stack of blank receipt from a hotel restaur
etc then fill them in and over time us them to verifi fictiti busi expens
claim the expens of other
anoth wai perpetr us actual receipt to gener unwarr reimburs is by
submit expens report for expens that were paid by other for instanc an employe
might save the receipt from a meal that wa paid for by anoth parti then request
reimburs for the meal himself
multipl reimburs
the least common of the expens reimburs scheme involv multipl
reimburs thi type of fraud involv the submiss of a singl expens more than
on time the most frequent exampl of a multipl reimburs scheme is the submiss
of sever type of support for the same expens
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1579
asset misappropri fraudul disburs financi transact
1580 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an employe would us for exampl an airlin ticket stub and a travel agenc invoic on
separ expens report so that he could be reimburs twice for the cost of a singl flight
the fraudster would have hi divis presid author on report and have the vice
presid approv the other so that neither would see both report addition the
perpetr allow a time lag of about a month between the file of the two report so that
the duplic would be less notic
in case where a compani doe not requir origin document as support some employe
even us sever copi of the same support document to gener multipl reimburs
rather than file two expens report employe mai also charg an item to the compani
credit card save the receipt and attach it to an expens report as if thei paid for the item
themselv the victim organ therefor end up pai twice for the same expens
detect of expens reimburs scheme
detect expens reimburs fraud involv two basic method the first of these is a
review and analysi of expens account the second detect method is a detail review
of expens report
review and analysi of expens account
gener expens account review us on of two method histor comparison or
comparison with budget amount a histor comparison compar the balanc
expend thi period in relat to the balanc spent in prior similar period when
perform thi review consid chang to the market servic or other compani
oper
budget ar estim of the monei andor time necessari to complet the task thei ar
base on past experi with consider for current and futur busi condit
therefor when compar actual and budget expens determin inordin expens
or inaccur budget estim is import
detail review of expens report
overal the best detect method is a detail review of employe expens report thi
method requir that the fraud examin have at the time of the examin a calendar and
a copi of the employe schedul for the relev period the examin should be familiar
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1581
with the travel and entertain polici of the compani addition the follow two
step mai help to detect and deter employe expens abus
requir employe to submit their expens report for a detail review befor payment
is reimburs if an employe know that hi expens report will be thoroughli
review he will be less like to includ fraudul expens on the report
period audit travel and entertain account thi is particularli effect shortli
befor employe perform review
prevent of expens reimburs scheme
detail expens report submiss and review
detail expens report should requir the follow inform
receipt or other support document
explan of the expens includ specif busi purpos
time period expens occur
place of expenditur
amount
it is not enough to have the detail report submit if thei ar not review a polici
requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the appropri
detail will help deter employe from submit person expens for reimburs
financi transact asset misappro priation inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1601
