2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Commitment to Professionalism and Diligence/Professionalism


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Professionalism and Diligence 
  
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall, at all times, demonstrate commitment to  
professionalism and diligence in the performance of his or her duties. 
 
Professionalism 
Professionalism is a quality desired by most people, but it is obtained at a price. 
Professionalism exists on two basic levels: (1) for the professional group as a whole and (2) 
for the individual Certified Fraud Examiner. Consider first the professional group as  
a whole.  
 
People frequently refer to professions, professional men and women, and professional 
activities without defining the meaning of the concept “professionalism.” Some fraud 
examiners say: “I might not know how to define it, but I know it when I see it.” The U.S. 
Supreme Court once said the same thing about pornography. The five principal 
characteristics that help differentiate professional fields of endeavor from other  
vocations are:  
• A body of specialized knowledge acquired by formal education. 
• Admission to the profession governed by standards of professional qualifications. 
• Recognition and acceptance by society of professional status, and concurrent recognition 
and acceptance of social responsibility by the professional. 
• Standards of conduct governing relationships of the professional with clients, colleagues, 
and the public. 
• A national organization devoted to the advancement of the obligations of the 
professional group. 
 



:


profession and dilig
a certifi fraud examin shall at all time demonstr commit to
profession and dilig in the perform of hi or her duti
profession
profession is a qualiti desir by most peopl but it is obtain at a price
profession exist on two basic level 1 for the profession group as a whole and 2
for the individu certifi fraud examin consid first the profession group as
a whole
peopl frequent refer to profess profession men and women and profession
activ without defin the mean of the concept profession some fraud
examin sai i might not know how to defin it but i know it when i see it the us
suprem court onc said the same thing about pornographi the five princip
characterist that help differenti profession field of endeavor from other
vocat ar
a bodi of special knowledg acquir by formal educ
admiss to the profess govern by standard of profession qualif
recognit and accept by societi of profession statu and concurr recognit
and accept of social respons by the profession
standard of conduct govern relationship of the profession with client colleagu
and the public
a nation organ devot to the advanc of the oblig of the
profession group
