2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Confidential Information


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Confidential Information 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner shall not reveal any confidential information obtained during 
a professional engagement without proper authorization. 
 
Confidential information rules in professional codes of ethics have the potential to create 
enormous conflicts — conflicts of principles and conflicts of values. Consider this possible 
exchange between a lawyer and client:  
 
 Client: 
Because you have taken my case on this fraud charge, I think you should know more about 
my background. 
 
 Lawyer: 
Go ahead. 
 
 Client: 
Three years ago, I participated  in an armed robbery and was never caught. My gun went off 
and killed the storekeeper. One of my buddies was accused and convicted. He’s had all his 
appeals and is scheduled to be executed tomorrow. What can you do? 
 
 Lawyer: 
Nothing. 
 
“Nothing” may be oversimplifying the situation, but the point is that lawyers have a keen 
awareness of the privileged information rights of their clients. Most lawyers will stoutly 
defend their duty not to endanger this client, even at the cost of a life. Most laymen are 
shocked at this particular. One commentator responded to a lawyer defending the position 
with a sharp retort: “Do you mean you will sa crifice an innocent man to a rule?” This 
incredulity is well aimed. It brings into sharp focus two conflicting values: the benefits of a 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1016   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
long-standing rule of legal practice and the sanctity of life itself. Not all situations are this 
dramatic, but Certified Fraud Examiners can nevertheless get into similar conflicts.  
 
Confidential information, for all practical purposes, is any and all information a Certified Fraud 
Examiner might obtain in the course of work, whether it be from the company or client for 
whom an investigation is performed or from any other source consulted during the work. 
The rules of confidential and privileged information are based on the belief that they 
facilitate a free flow of information between parties to the relationship. The nature of a fraud 
examination might make it necessary for Certified Fraud Examiners to have access to 
sensitive information. Clients and employers would be less likely to reveal such information 
or to provide access to sources if they could not trust a Certified Fraud Examiner to keep  
it confidential.  
 
Privileged information  is information that cannot be demanded, even by a court. Common law 
privilege exists for husband-wife and attorney-client relationships, and physician-patient and 
priest-penitent relationships have obtained the privilege through state statutes. The attorney-client 
privilege is statutory in some jurisdictions. Certified Fraud Examiners do not have any 
such privilege in common law or by statute. In all the recognized privilege relationships, the 
professional person is obligated to observe the privilege; it can be waived only by the client, 
patient, or penitent. (These people are said to be the holders of the privilege.) Likewise, a 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s client or employer is the holder of the confidence. (The Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  contains additional information on this subject.) 
 
The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics does not assume a privileged 
status for the fraud examiner client/employer relationship. However, the examiner’s client or 
employer holds the key known as “proper authorization” in the rule. If the client or 
employer consents to disclosure of information otherwise considered confidential, then the 
Certified Fraud Examiner can transmit it to others. Sometimes consent is given when the 
consenter does not know exactly what information will be conveyed. Even with consent, 
therefore, a Certified Fraud Examiner should be careful to let the client/employer know 
what the consent covers. The best rule of prudence is to let the client/employer make the 
actual disclosure by transmitting the Certified Fraud Examiner’s report, working papers, or 
other documentation. Then the client not only knows what is being disclosed but is the one 
making the disclosure.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  ACFE Code of Professional Ethics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.1017 
Confidential information relationships do not die with the severance of the Certified Fraud 
Examiner-client or Certified Fraud Examiner-employer relationship. The confidentiality rule 
does not permit disclosure after the assignment is finished, or there is no clause permitting 
disclosure after a Certified Fraud Examiner is fired, resigns, or retires from an employing 
organization. Examiners who write “kiss and te ll” memoirs about the inner secrets of an 
organization violate the confidentiality rule in the most blatant manner.  
 



:


confidenti inform
a certifi fraud examin shall not reveal ani confidenti inform obtain dure
a profession engag without proper author
confidenti inform rule in profession code of ethic have the potenti to creat
enorm conflict conflict of principl and conflict of valu consid thi possibl
exchang between a lawyer and client
client
becaus you have taken my case on thi fraud charg i think you should know more about
my background
lawyer
go ahead
client
three year ago i particip in an arm robberi and wa never caught my gun went off
and kill the storekeep on of my buddi wa accus and convict he had all hi
appeal and is schedul to be execut tomorrow what can you do
lawyer
noth
noth mai be oversimplifi the situat but the point is that lawyer have a keen
awar of the privileg inform right of their client most lawyer will stoutli
defend their duti not to endang thi client even at the cost of a life most laymen ar
shock at thi particular on comment respond to a lawyer defend the posit
with a sharp retort do you mean you will sa crific an innoc man to a rule thi
incredul is well aim it bring into sharp focu two conflict valu the benefit of a
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41016 2011 fraud examin manual
longstand rule of legal practic and the sanctiti of life itself not all situat ar thi
dramat but certifi fraud examin can nevertheless get into similar conflict
confidenti inform for all practic purpos is ani and all inform a certifi fraud
examin might obtain in the cours of work whether it be from the compani or client for
whom an investig is perform or from ani other sourc consult dure the work
the rule of confidenti and privileg inform ar base on the belief that thei
facilit a free flow of inform between parti to the relationship the natur of a fraud
examin might make it necessari for certifi fraud examin to have access to
sensit inform client and employ would be less like to reveal such inform
or to provid access to sourc if thei could not trust a certifi fraud examin to keep
it confidenti
privileg inform is inform that cannot be demand even by a court common law
privileg exist for husbandwif and attorneycli relationship and physicianpati and
priestpenit relationship have obtain the privileg through state statut the attorneycli
privileg is statutori in some jurisdict certifi fraud examin do not have ani
such privileg in common law or by statut in all the recogn privileg relationship the
profession person is oblig to observ the privileg it can be waiv onli by the client
patient or penit these peopl ar said to be the holder of the privileg likewis a
certifi fraud examin client or employ is the holder of the confid the law
section of the fraud examin manual contain addit inform on thi subject
the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic doe not assum a privileg
statu for the fraud examin clientemploy relationship howev the examin client or
employ hold the kei known as proper author in the rule if the client or
employ consent to disclosur of inform otherwis consid confidenti then the
certifi fraud examin can transmit it to other sometim consent is given when the
consent doe not know exactli what inform will be convei even with consent
therefor a certifi fraud examin should be care to let the clientemploy know
what the consent cover the best rule of prudenc is to let the clientemploy make the
actual disclosur by transmit the certifi fraud examin report work paper or
other document then the client not onli know what is be disclos but is the on
make the disclosur
fraud prevent and deterr acf code of profession ethic
2011 fraud examin manual 41017
confidenti inform relationship do not die with the sever of the certifi fraud
examinercli or certifi fraud examineremploy relationship the confidenti rule
doe not permit disclosur after the assign is finish or there is no claus permit
disclosur after a certifi fraud examin is fire resign or retir from an emploi
organ examin who write kiss and te ll memoir about the inner secret of an
organ violat the confidenti rule in the most blatant manner
