2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ACFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS/Confidential Information/Proper Authorization


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


Proper Authorization 
As just mentioned, one form of “proper author ization” is the consent given by a Certified 
Fraud Examiner’s client or employer. Additional forms of authorization are possible. Other 
professions have exceptions that void the confidentiality or privilege rules. Lawyers can 
reveal client confidences if doing so is necessary to prevent a future crime. CPAs are  
not bound by confidentiality when responding to a court subpoena or summons,  
when participating in quality control reviews, or when initiating complaints to their 
disciplinary bodies.  
 
Likewise, Certified Fraud Examiners are not bound by confidentiality when doing so would 
make them parties to a violation of the law. Care must be taken about remaining silent when 
silence could be construed as obstructing justice or engaging in a conspiracy. The advice of 
an attorney should be sought in such cases.  
 
Questions may arise over information received from someone being investigated. Suppose 
an employee being questioned tells the Certified Fraud Examiner something “in confidence” 
concerning his role in a theft. Fraud examiners must remember that the confidentiality 
relationship runs first to the client or employer, and that this promise of confidentiality is 
understood to exist without being spoken. In the case of the employee-informant, the fraud 
examiner does not have an understood or unspoken promise of confidentiality and is not 
bound by the rule with respect to the informant. If the fraud examiner promises the 
employee-informant “confidentiality,” the promise will probably turn out to be a lie, because 
the examiner has also promised the client/employer a report on all the relevant evidence. A 
Certified Fraud Examiner should not promise confidentiality or leniency to an informant for 
the purpose of extracting testimony. A Certified Fraud Examiner’s reputation and 
effectiveness depends upon the integrity of the Certified Fraud Examiner’s word.  
 
ACFE Code of Professional Ethics   Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.1018   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


proper author
as just mention on form of proper author izat is the consent given by a certifi
fraud examin client or employ addit form of author ar possibl other
profess have except that void the confidenti or privileg rule lawyer can
reveal client confid if do so is necessari to prevent a futur crime cpa ar
not bound by confidenti when respond to a court subpoena or summon
when particip in qualiti control review or when initi complaint to their
disciplinari bodi
likewis certifi fraud examin ar not bound by confidenti when do so would
make them parti to a violat of the law care must be taken about remain silent when
silenc could be constru as obstruct justic or engag in a conspiraci the advic of
an attornei should be sought in such case
question mai aris over inform receiv from someon be investig suppos
an employe be question tell the certifi fraud examin someth in confid
concern hi role in a theft fraud examin must rememb that the confidenti
relationship run first to the client or employ and that thi promis of confidenti is
understood to exist without be spoken in the case of the employeeinform the fraud
examin doe not have an understood or unspoken promis of confidenti and is not
bound by the rule with respect to the inform if the fraud examin promis the
employeeinform confidenti the promis will probabl turn out to be a lie becaus
the examin ha also promis the clientemploy a report on all the relev evid a
certifi fraud examin should not promis confidenti or lenienc to an inform for
the purpos of extract testimoni a certifi fraud examin reput and
effect depend upon the integr of the certifi fraud examin word
acf code of profession ethic fraud prevent and deterr
41018 2011 fraud examin manual
