2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/CFE CODE OF PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS/CFE Code of Professional Standards/IV. Standards of Examination


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Ethics for Fraud Examiners


:


IV. Standards of Examination 
 
A.  Fraud Examinations  
  
1.    Fraud examinations shall be conducted in a legal, professional, and thorough 
manner. The fraud examiner’s objective shall be to obtain evidence and information 
that is complete, reliable, and relevant.  
  
2.  Members shall establish predication and sc ope priorities at the outset of a fraud 
examination and continuously reevaluate them as the examination proceeds. 
Members shall strive for efficiency in their examination.   
  
3.  Members shall be alert to the possibility of conjecture, unsubstantiated opinion, and 
bias of witnesses and others. Members shall consider both exculpatory and 
inculpatory evidence. 
 
B. Evidence  
 
1.  Members shall endeavor to establish effective control and management procedures 
for documents. Members shall be cognizant of the chain of custody including origin, 
possession, and disposition of relevant evidence and material. Members shall strive 
to preserve the integrity of relevant evidence and material. 
 
2.  Members’ work product may vary with the circumstances of each fraud examination. 
The extent of documentation shall be subject to the needs and objectives of the 
client or employer.  
 



:


iv standard of examin
a fraud examin
1 fraud examin shall be conduct in a legal profession and thorough
manner the fraud examin object shall be to obtain evid and inform
that is complet reliabl and relev
2 member shall establish predic and sc op prioriti at the outset of a fraud
examin and continu reevalu them as the examin proce
member shall strive for effici in their examin
3 member shall be alert to the possibl of conjectur unsubstanti opinion and
bia of wit and other member shall consid both exculpatori and
inculpatori evid
b evid
1 member shall endeavor to establish effect control and manag procedur
for document member shall be cogniz of the chain of custodi includ origin
possess and disposit of relev evid and materi member shall strive
to preserv the integr of relev evid and materi
2 member work product mai vari with the circumst of each fraud examin
the extent of document shall be subject to the need and object of the
client or employ
