2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Definition of Evidence


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Definition of Evidence 
Black’s Law Dictionary defines evidence as: 
 
Anything perceivable by the five senses, and any proof such as testimony of witnesses, records, 
documents, facts, data, or tangible objects legally presented at trial to prove a contention and 
induce a belief in the minds of a jury. 
 
Evidence refers to an intricate rule, developed and refined over hundreds of years, that is 
designed to ensure that only relevant and probative evidence is admitted in court proceedings, 
and that irrelevant, unreliable, and prejudicial evidence is excluded so that cases can be fairly 
and expeditiously decided. 
 
Every aspect of trying a case — from filing the complaint through discovery, into the 
presentation of witnesses and exhibits — is affected by rules of evidence. This body of law 
covers not just what counts as evidence, but how that evidence is gathered, handled, and 
presented.  
 
Evidence in federal courts is governed by the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE). These rules 
set out what can and cannot be introduced during a dispute. In the late 1960s, a U.S. Supreme 
Court panel began codifying centuries of common law into the FRE. What had previously 
been a far-flung set of precedents, buried in local jurisdictions and lengthy appeals decisions, 
was gathered into a singular body of information. Congress passed the Uniform Code of 
Evidence in 1974 as Public Law No. 93-595. State and local courts often have some 
specialized rules of evidence, but these rules are themselves based on federal guidelines.  
 
The rules of evidence are complex, and counsel should be contacted if an important question 
of evidence arises. This part focuses on the more important rules and those of greatest 
interest to fraud examiners.  
 
 



:


definit of evid
black law dictionari defin evid as
anyth perceiv by the five sens and ani proof such as testimoni of wit record
document fact data or tangibl object legal present at trial to prove a content and
induc a belief in the mind of a juri
evid refer to an intric rule develop and refin over hundr of year that is
design to ensur that onli relev and prob evid is admit in court proceed
and that irrelev unreli and prejudici evid is exclud so that case can be fairli
and expediti decid
everi aspect of try a case from file the complaint through discoveri into the
present of wit and exhibit is affect by rule of evid thi bodi of law
cover not just what count as evid but how that evid is gather handl and
present
evid in feder court is govern by the feder rule of evid fre these rule
set out what can and cannot be introduc dure a disput in the late 1960 a us suprem
court panel began codifi centuri of common law into the fre what had previous
been a farflung set of preced buri in local jurisdict and lengthi appeal decis
wa gather into a singular bodi of inform congress pass the uniform code of
evid in 1974 as public law no 93595 state and local court often have some
special rule of evid but these rule ar themselv base on feder guidelin
the rule of evid ar complex and counsel should be contact if an import question
of evid aris thi part focus on the more import rule and those of greatest
interest to fraud examin
