2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Exhibits/Photographs


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Photographs 
Concerning photographs, it is necessary to establish their fidelity to the object they claim to 
represent. This means that the offering party must prove that the picture is unaltered and 
shows what the proponent claims it shows. Generally it is enough to have a witness familiar 
with the object or space in a photo to corroborate it (e.g., “Yes, that’s the hallway running 
between our two buildings.”). The matter gets more complicated when a photo is 
controversial. This can require technical specifications for proper foundation. In the most 
famous trial since Sam Sheppard, O.J. Simpson’s lawyers challenged a photo of the defendant 
wearing Bruno Mali shoes as “doctored.” Both sides introduced experts to discuss whether 
the photo had been altered, what sort of camera, lens, and environmental conditions were 
involved, etc. The same issues can arise with photos in any trial.   
 
In some unusual situations, a photo may reveal information that no witness can corroborate. 
There has been at least one instance where the background of a photo showed a stabbing that 
took place in a crowd. No one, not even the photographer, saw the stabbing at the time. In 
unusual situations where a photo communicates evidence not substantiated elsewhere, the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.714  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation of the photograph will need more strength — including technical details on the 
camera, the film, who took the shot, why and where, etc.  
 
The exceptions make photos seem more legally fraught than they are. They usually are 
admitted with little objection. Photos do not even have to be contemporary with the crime or 
grievance to which they pertain. If a photograph is established as accurate in its portrayal, it 
can be shot after the original act.  
 



:


photograph
concern photograph it is necessari to establish their fidel to the object thei claim to
repres thi mean that the offer parti must prove that the pictur is unalt and
show what the propon claim it show gener it is enough to have a wit familiar
with the object or space in a photo to corrobor it eg ye that the hallwai run
between our two build the matter get more complic when a photo is
controversi thi can requir technic specif for proper foundat in the most
famou trial sinc sam sheppard oj simpson lawyer challeng a photo of the defend
wear bruno mali shoe as doctor both side introduc expert to discuss whether
the photo had been alter what sort of camera len and environment condit were
involv etc the same issu can aris with photo in ani trial
in some unusu situat a photo mai reveal inform that no wit can corrobor
there ha been at least on instanc where the background of a photo show a stab that
took place in a crowd no on not even the photograph saw the stab at the time in
unusu situat where a photo commun evid not substanti elsewher the
basic principl of evid law
2714 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat of the photograph will need more strength includ technic detail on the
camera the film who took the shot why and where etc
the except make photo seem more legal fraught than thei ar thei usual ar
admit with littl object photo do not even have to be contemporari with the crime or
grievanc to which thei pertain if a photograph is establish as accur in it portray it
can be shot after the origin act
