2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Hearsay/Printed Matter, Learned Treatises, and Refresher Writings


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Printed Matter, Learned Treatises, and Refresher Writings 
Written materials that add to the court’s knowledge of an issue are excepted from the hearsay 
rule. This exception often bears on the testimony of expert witnesses who often use 
published material in their work. 
 
Printed materials  that support technical or professional assertions, such as commodity market 
reports, stock market quotes, mortality tables, cost of living indexes, etc., are admissible if 
they are “generally used and relied upon by the public or by persons in particular 
occupations.” The Federal Rules of Evidence specifically mentions market reports and 
commercial publications. 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence also creates a hearsay exception for learned treatises, providing 
that an authoritative work is admissible to either support or attack the opinion of an expert 
witness and that the works are established as reliable authority. However, some courts limit 
the rule. In these jurisdictions, specialized “treatises, periodicals, or pamphlets” can be 
referenced only during cross-examination. In a world of proliferating and sometimes 
contradictory sources of information, just what counts as a learned treatise and what is a 
fringe group’s manifesto is not immediately clear. 
Writing used to refresh a witness’s memory is admissible under special circumstances. Basically, 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.723 
courts may permit testifying witnesses to refresh or revive their memory by referring to a 
writing or anything else if the witnesses will thereafter be able to testify without depending on 
the terms of the writing. For example, Whistler, who is serving as a witness at a fraud trial, 
wants to see some notes he wrote two years ago to make sure he got the numbers right in his 
testimony. He is allowed to consult the notes and continue with his testimony. There is a 
lawyerly aspect to this rule—the text of the notes is admissible, too, but only if the opposing 
attorney requests the admission.  
 



:


print matter learn treatis and refresh write
written materi that add to the court knowledg of an issu ar except from the hearsai
rule thi except often bear on the testimoni of expert wit who often us
publish materi in their work
print materi that support technic or profession assert such as commod market
report stock market quot mortal tabl cost of live index etc ar admiss if
thei ar gener us and reli upon by the public or by person in particular
occup the feder rule of evid specif mention market report and
commerci public
the feder rule of evid also creat a hearsai except for learn treatis provid
that an authorit work is admiss to either support or attack the opinion of an expert
wit and that the work ar establish as reliabl author howev some court limit
the rule in these jurisdict special treatis period or pamphlet can be
referenc onli dure crossexamin in a world of prolifer and sometim
contradictori sourc of inform just what count as a learn treatis and what is a
fring group manifesto is not immedi clear
write us to refresh a witnesss memori is admiss under special circumst basic
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2723
court mai permit testifi wit to refresh or reviv their memori by refer to a
write or anyth els if the wit will thereaft be abl to testifi without depend on
the term of the write for exampl whistler who is serv as a wit at a fraud trial
want to see some note he wrote two year ago to make sure he got the number right in hi
testimoni he is allow to consult the note and continu with hi testimoni there is a
lawyerli aspect to thi ruleth text of the note is admiss too but onli if the oppos
attornei request the admiss
