2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Impeachment


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Impeachment 
The above discussion concerns the manner in which evidence is introduced at trial, usually 
during direct examination. There is, of course, another side to testimony: cross-examination. 
Under the Rules of Evidence and the Sixth Amendment — which guarantees a defendant the 
right to confront witnesses — the adverse party is entitled to offer evidence to impeach the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.724  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
testimony or credibility of a witness. Impeachment is the practice of bringing out matters that 
attack a witness’s credibility.  
 
There are numerous ways an attorney might impeach a witness, but the most common ways 
include efforts to show that the witness:  
• Is influenced by bias or self-interest 
• Has an impaired ability to observe   
• Made prior inconsistent statements 
• Has been convicted of a felony 
• Has a reputation for untruthfulness 
 
Impeachment by bias shows that the witness has reason, or at least opportunity, to skew the 
evidence against one of the parties in the litigation. Questioning on cross-examination will 
cover any pecuniary interest the witness has in the case, any connection the witness might 
have to any matter or litigant, and any other information that will make the witness appear to 
have some interest in favoring one party over another. 
 
Another way to impeach witnesses is to show that their ability to observe was impaired. Matters of 
observance include the ability to see, hear, smell, or feel some item in question.  
 
Nothing overturns a witness’s statements like inconsistency. Opposing lawyers will always 
confront any witness on cross-examination with any apparent inconsistencies between the 
trial testimony and statements, testimony, or information given by the witness on other 
occasions.  
 
A witness’s credibility may be challenged, though not automatically impeached, by showing that 
the person has been convicted of a felony crime. The governing rule, Rule 609 of the Federal Rules of 
Evidence, offers a few basic instructions. First, convictions for acts involving dishonesty, 
such as larceny, theft, or fraud, are especially harmful to a witness’s testimony. Second, any 
witness may be impeached with any prior felony conviction. Third, evidence of any prior 
conviction is presumably inadmissible if the conviction is more than 10 years old. 
 
Finally, any witness may be impeached by proof of reputation for untruthfulness.  
 
Certified Fraud Examiners should keep in mind that the above methods of impeachment may 
be used not only on the defendant and defense witnesses, but also on witnesses for the 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.725 
prosecution or defense. Inquiries should be made before trial to determine if a prosecution or 
defense witness is subject to impeachment, and, if so, appropriate steps should be taken. 
 
 



:


impeach
the abov discuss concern the manner in which evid is introduc at trial usual
dure direct examin there is of cours anoth side to testimoni crossexamin
under the rule of evid and the sixth amend which guarante a defend the
right to confront wit the advers parti is entitl to offer evid to impeach the
basic principl of evid law
2724 2011 fraud examin manual
testimoni or credibl of a wit impeach is the practic of bring out matter that
attack a witnesss credibl
there ar numer wai an attornei might impeach a wit but the most common wai
includ effort to show that the wit
is influenc by bia or selfinterest
ha an impair abil to observ
made prior inconsist statement
ha been convict of a feloni
ha a reput for untruth
impeach by bia show that the wit ha reason or at least opportun to skew the
evid against on of the parti in the litig question on crossexamin will
cover ani pecuniari interest the wit ha in the case ani connect the wit might
have to ani matter or litig and ani other inform that will make the wit appear to
have some interest in favor on parti over anoth
anoth wai to impeach wit is to show that their abil to observ wa impair matter of
observ includ the abil to see hear smell or feel some item in question
noth overturn a witnesss statement like inconsist oppos lawyer will alwai
confront ani wit on crossexamin with ani appar inconsist between the
trial testimoni and statement testimoni or inform given by the wit on other
occas
a witnesss credibl mai be challeng though not automat impeach by show that
the person ha been convict of a feloni crime the govern rule rule 609 of the feder rule of
evid offer a few basic instruct first convict for act involv dishonesti
such as larceni theft or fraud ar especi harm to a witnesss testimoni second ani
wit mai be impeach with ani prior feloni convict third evid of ani prior
convict is presum inadmiss if the convict is more than 10 year old
final ani wit mai be impeach by proof of reput for untruth
certifi fraud examin should keep in mind that the abov method of impeach mai
be us not onli on the defend and defens wit but also on wit for the
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2725
prosecut or defens inquiri should be made befor trial to determin if a prosecut or
defens wit is subject to impeach and if so appropri step should be taken
