2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Privileges/Accountant-Client Privilege


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Accountant-Client Privilege 
A few states have a weak accountant-client privilege that allows an accountant to resist 
production of a client’s work papers or documents. No such privilege is recognized in federal 
court, and the state privileges may be overcome by a showing of need or by the service of a 
subpoena.  
 
There is, however, a Federally Authorized Tax Practitioner Privilege under section 7525 of 
the Internal Revenue Code. This privilege is a evidentiary privilege that provides limited 
protection in federal tax law.  It applies only in situations where a CPA is providing tax advice  
in noncriminal proceedings before the IRS or before a federal court.  
 
Nevertheless, as discussed above, in federal proceedings, communications between a client 
and a third-party, such as an accountant, may be protected under the attorney-client privilege 
or the attorney work product doctrine.  
 
The attorney-client privilege extends to accountants if the attorney hired the accountant to 
assist in rendering legal advice. Additionally, the privilege extends to an accountant’s 
documents, which were made at the attorney’s request, used to render legal advice. This 
privilege was clarified in U.S. v. Cote, which concluded that there is no protection for 
accounting services if no legal advice was sought. In Cote, the client engaged the accountant 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.733 
before retaining the lawyer, the client and accountant had a long-standing professional 
relationship, and the attorney did not control or supervise the accountant’s efforts or work 
product.  
 
In addition, the attorney work product protection extends to information and documents 
prepared by the consultants and examiners hired by the attorneys, including accountants. 
However, any protection will be waived if the accountant is called to testify as an expert 
witness at trial.  
 
In cases where accountants serve as expert witnesses, the work product doctrine may apply. 
Protection under the work product doctrine generally depends on whether the accountant 
serves as a testifying expert or a non-testifying (consulting) expert. Nothing created by the 
testifying expert is privileged from discovery. Conversely, the rules of discovery generally 
protect communications between a non-testifying expert, the attorney, and the party from 
disclosure to adversaries. However, the protection against disclosure of communications with 
non-testifying experts can be lost, and this commonly occurs when the non-testifying expert’s 
communications are released to others, particularly to testifying experts. This topic is 
discussed in further detail below.  
 
There are a number of other privileges that are less likely to be asserted in fraud actions, 
including the priest-penitent  and physician-patient  privileges. 
 
 
  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.801 



:


accountantcli privileg
a few state have a weak accountantcli privileg that allow an account to resist
product of a client work paper or document no such privileg is recogn in feder
court and the state privileg mai be overcom by a show of need or by the servic of a
subpoena
there is howev a feder author tax practition privileg under section 7525 of
the intern revenu code thi privileg is a evidentiari privileg that provid limit
protect in feder tax law it appli onli in situat where a cpa is provid tax advic
in noncrimin proceed befor the ir or befor a feder court
nevertheless as discuss abov in feder proceed commun between a client
and a thirdparti such as an account mai be protect under the attorneycli privileg
or the attornei work product doctrin
the attorneycli privileg extend to account if the attornei hire the account to
assist in render legal advic addition the privileg extend to an account
document which were made at the attornei request us to render legal advic thi
privileg wa clarifi in us v cote which conclud that there is no protect for
account servic if no legal advic wa sought in cote the client engag the account
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2733
befor retain the lawyer the client and account had a longstand profession
relationship and the attornei did not control or supervis the account effort or work
product
in addit the attornei work product protect extend to inform and document
prepar by the consult and examin hire by the attornei includ account
howev ani protect will be waiv if the account is call to testifi as an expert
wit at trial
in case where account serv as expert wit the work product doctrin mai appli
protect under the work product doctrin gener depend on whether the account
serv as a testifi expert or a nontestifi consult expert noth creat by the
testifi expert is privileg from discoveri convers the rule of discoveri gener
protect commun between a nontestifi expert the attornei and the parti from
disclosur to adversari howev the protect against disclosur of commun with
nontestifi expert can be lost and thi commonli occur when the nontestifi expert
commun ar releas to other particularli to testifi expert thi topic is
discuss in further detail below
there ar a number of other privileg that ar less like to be assert in fraud action
includ the priestpenit and physicianpati privileg
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2801
