2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


CONSUMER FRAUD 
 
Complaints of consumer fraud can be found as far back as the first century when Pliny the 
Elder told of the adulterated honey being sold in Rome and the mixing of wine with gypsum, 
lime, pitch, rosin, wood ashes, salt, sulphur, and other artificial additives.  
 
Schemes against consumers range from home repair frauds to more sophisticated scams. In 
a nationwide solicitation, l00,000 people purchased light bulbs because they were persuaded 
that the profits were going to the disabled. They were, but the disabilities certified by doctors 
included such crippling disorders as acne, hay fever, nervousness, and obesity. Those 
“donating” paid about three times the going price for similar light bulbs.  
 
Sometimes fraud occurs when the immediate victim cannot fight back: a Tennessee funeral 
director was charged with burying people without caskets and throwing trash in on top of 
the corpses.  
 
Scandals involving the ministry, especially television evangelism, also have captured 
headlines. In l988, U.S. evangelist Jim Bakker was indicted on mail fraud charges stemming 
from the television sale of lifetime “partnerships” in a vacation hotel at the Heritage USA 
theme park. Prosecutors were able to document that Bakker and his wife, Tammy Fay, 
received about $3.5 million in “bonuses” from the scheme. Bakker received a 45-year prison 
sentence, which later was reduced. He is now out of prison. 
 
Fraud is notably common in the repair and service industries. Home repair fraud, frequently 
perpetrated against the elderly, ranges from the sale or use of substandard materials — such as 
roofing — to securing payment without doing any work at all. Automobile repairs often 
involve fraudulent acts. One study maintained that 53 cents of every “repair” dollar was 
wasted because of unnecessary work, overcharging, services never performed, or 
incompetence. A U.S. government survey concluded that American motorists are 
overcharged an average of $l50 a car each year.  
 
In Australia, John Braithwaite found that used car dealers rolled back odometers on a third 
of the cars they offer for sale. Interviews with the dealers in Australia illustrate the kind of 
reasoning that can buttress such illegal activity. One salesman said: “People pay too much 
attention to the mileage reading on a car. There might be a car with a low mileage reading 
but all sorts of faults, and another perfect car with a high mileage reading. It doesn’t matter 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1702                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
what the mileage reading is, but how good the car is. So if you turn the mileage reading back 
on a car in perfect order, you’re encouraging people to buy a good car.” There was no 
evidence, however, that it was only on “good” cars that the odometer was made to provide a 
lower reading. 
 
Another Australian dealer said: “They think because you are a used car dealer you are a liar. 
So they treat you like one and lie to you. Can you blame the dealer for lying back?” 1 
 
 
Con Schemes 
Confidence games involve a range of fraudulent conduct usually committed by professional 
“con artists” against unsuspecting victims. The victims can be organizations but more 
commonly are individuals. Con men usually act alone but they may group together for a 
particular complex endeavor.  
 
These are some of the many kinds of confidence schemes. Telemarketing schemes and 
pyramid schemes are discussed in more detail at the end of the chapter. 
 
Advance Fee Swindles and Debt Consolidation Schemes 
Advance fee swindles are structured to obtain an illegal gain by falsely promising the delivery 
of a product or a service. In some schemes, the product is marketed to a large number of 
customers and then the operation is shut down prior to the delivery stage.  
 
People who find themselves in debt sometimes turn to consolidation agencies for help. 
These agencies do not advance loans, but rather act as an intermediary between debtor and 
creditor. Some agencies are legitimate, many are not. 
 
In a typical scenario, the debtor contacts the agency, which compiles a list of the creditors 
and the amount of monthly payments. The agency usually writes letters to the creditors 
requesting a workout plan at lower monthly payments spread over a longer period of time. 
The creditors will often offer such an arrangement if they feel that the debt will thereby be 
paid or if the workout plan will forestall bankruptcy or default by the creditor. 
                                                          
1John Braithwaite, “An Exploratory Study of Used Car Fr aud,” in Paul R. Wilson and John Braithwaite (Eds.), 
Two Faces of Deviance. Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1978, pp. 101-122.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1703 
Unscrupulous debt consolidation schemes often involve the agency collecting the money 
from the debtor but not forwarding it to the creditors. In some instances, considerable time 
can pass before the debtor finds out that his money has been misappropriated. 
 
Another variation of the debt consolidation scheme occurs when a customer is guaranteed 
that he will receive a loan or a credit card regardless of his credit rating. Typically, the victims 
have been rejected by legitimate financial institutions because their credit ratings are poor. 
The victim must pay a processing fee for the application to be accepted. After the victim 
pays the fee, the con artist disappears.  
 
Directory Advertising Schemes 
The essence of directory advertising schemes is the sale of advertising in a non-existent 
magazine or directory. A fake (or in some cases a real) directory is shown to the potential 
victim. The victim contracts and pays for display or classified advertising that is to appear 
some months in the future. By that time, the fraudster has disappeared. 
  
Merchandising Schemes 
Merchandising schemes run a wide gamut. If you have ever paid for an item and received  
less than what was advertised, you have been the victim of a merchandising scheme.  
 
Personal Improvement Frauds 
These frauds prey upon the desire of people to improve their education or job skills; in some 
instances, they appeal to a person’s appearance.  
  
Diploma Mills 
For what is often a hefty fee, a diploma can be purchased by those who apply. The fraudster 
usually claims that the fee is for processing the application or for verifying the experience 
necessary for the degree to be awarded. The hallmark of the diploma mill is the ease with 
which the degree is obtained, though the degree, because the school is not accredited, is 
essentially worthless. 
 
Correspondence schools may also operate with the same modus operandi as diploma mills. 
Investigators have at times submitted the scribblings of their infant children to schools that 
advertise that they will provide art lessons to persons who demonstrate talent; usually the 
infants’ “drawings” are judged to show considerable ability, and the submitter is asked to 
send a fee to begin receiving the lessons. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1704                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Modeling Schools 
Modeling schools appeal to the vanity of some people. In the typical scheme, the modeling 
school representative tells the prospective student that he will prepare a portfolio of portraits 
to be sent to potential customers who may employ the victim as a model. The victim is then 
charged an inflated price for the pictures. Con game modeling schools often claim —
 inaccurately — connections to famous people and maintain that they have been instrumental 
in starting the careers of successful models. The schools sometimes target parents and 
grandparents with lures of the money that can be earned by their “exceptionally pretty” 
infant children or grandchildren. 
 
Direct Debit from Checking Accounts     
When a customer decides to purchase an item (from a catalog or over the phone), he is told 
he can purchase it rapidly and simply by giving his bank’s name and his checking account 
number for a direct debit from his account. This results in unauthorized withdrawals from 
the account. 
 
Equity-Skimming Schemes    
Falling for this scam can cost consumers their homes. Con men try to talk the mark out of 
the equity on their homes and may try to persuade them to borrow against their equity. 
 
Fundraising, Non-profits, and Religious Schemes    
Some groups use “cancer” or “AIDS” in their title to convince the consumer they are 
legitimate charitable organizations. Others o ffer a prize or award for the consumer as a 
reward for their contribution.  
 
Home-Based Businesses    
A popular fad today, many companies marketing home-based businesses require a person to 
buy materials for assembly-at-home products. The consumer is promised that the company 
will purchase the completed products, and when it does not, the consumer is left with a bad 
investment and a stock of cheap, worthless goods. 
 
Home Improvements    
A common scam involves phony repair people selling their services door-to-door. After 
paying them to fix a roof, window, or other item, the consumer is left with unfinished repair 
work and no workmen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1705 
Money Manager or Financial Planner    
These scams involve convincing marks to invest in low-risk, high-return opportunities. Of 
course, consumers who invest in these opportunities see no returns at all. 
 
Phone Card Schemes    
The con artist calls, claiming to be with the consumer’s long distance company, and asks to 
confirm their card number. If the number is revealed, the consumer’s next long distance bill 
will contain some expensive calls he did not make.  
 
Scavenger or Revenge Scheme    
This involves the company that initially conned the consumer. Using a different company’s 
name, the outfit contacts the consumer again and asks if he would like to help put the 
unethical company out of business and get his money back. Naturally, an up-front fee is 
required to finance the investigation. 
 
Sweepstakes, Giveaways, and Prizes    
Many of these so-called “free gifts” require the consumer to pay a fee (usually labeled a 
“shipping” fee) before collecting. This fee actually covers the cost of the merchandise 
deemed “free.” 
 
College Scholarship Services    
This bogus service usually charges an up-front fee or advanced payment fee for finding a 
scholarship suitable for the applicant. 
 
Credit Repair    
Some of these firms may charge unnecessary fees to fix credit problems, knowing that the 
consumer could easily call the credit bureau and request a copy of his credit report himself. 
 
Other Con Schemes 
Block Hustle    
So-called because purveyors of cheap stereo equipment, jewelry, and watches usually hawk 
their goods on street corners or at traffic lights. The items for sale are generally either stolen 
or imitations of brand names. 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1706                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Pigeon Drop   
This is often used on middle-aged or elderly women who are likely to have a savings 
account. Pretending to find a wallet full of money, the con men convince their mark that 
they should divide the “discovered” money. As a show of good faith, each should withdraw 
a sum of money from their bank and turn it over to a lawyer or another third-party for 
safekeeping. They agree to place an ad in a newspaper for the lost wallet. If it is not claimed 
within a certain amount of time, they will split the money. Of course, when the designated 
time expires, the victim will find that the lawyer was part of the scam and that her money has 
vanished. 
 
Bank Examiner Swindle     
Bank examiner swindles are also perpetrated on older women, especially widows with access 
to their husbands’ life insurance policies. The con man impersonates a bank examiner 
investigating her bank. He asks her to withdraw a certain amount of cash from her account, 
place it in an envelope, and allow him to inspect the bills for counterfeits. Many con men use 
false IDs and dress to take on this role. 
 
Jamaican Handkerchief or Envelope Switch    
In this con, the criminal puts his money into an envelope with the mark’s money and then 
unobtrusively trades this parcel for another that looks like the same thing but is instead 
bulked up with worthless paper. 
 
The Obituary Hustle   
Capitalizing on a bereaved person’s grief, the con man, culling information from an obituary, 
poses as a delivery person collecting money for a package or other order the deceased 
supposedly made.  
 
Three-Card Monte    
An old card game that involves two people who fleece an unsuspecting onlooker into a 
rigged game. 
 
Poker Bunco    
This scam can involve poker, dice, pool, and other games. The con man is of course an 
expert and hustles the mark. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1707 
Missing-Heir Scheme    
In the modern version of this scam, the con man poses as a probate investigator or other 
genealogist, charging fees to distribute an inheritance. 
 
Gold Mine Swindle    
Here, the con man claims to own a productive mine but requires money to start operation. 
The scheme involves selling shares to the mine. 
 
Spanish Prisoner Game    
This con can be traced back to the Spanish Armada of the sixteenth century. A businessman 
receives a letter purportedly from a hostage held prisoner in some foreign land. He needs 
money to bribe his captors or pay a ransom. As collateral, a treasure map or other “valuable 
papers” are often enclosed. 
 
Murphy Game    
Also known as “Miss Murphy,” “paddy hustle,” or “carpet game,” the traditional con is 
played in places where prostitution occurs. The con artist plays a pimp but never delivers the 
prostitute. 
 
Badger Game    
A refined version of Miss Murphy, but in this con, the con woman or prostitute is in on the 
scam. The con artist robs the mark of his wallet through simple theft or pretense of 
blackmail. 
 
Goat Pasture Scam    
The mark receives a call from a person who says he’s from an oil and gas service that is 
sponsoring a lottery on mineral rights. If the consumer invests a certain tax deductible sum, 
they can receive a percentage of the income in royalty payments. 
 
Other common hustles occur in the privacy of one’s own home or through telephone 
solicitations (i.e., boiler rooms). 
 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1708                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telemarkting Fraud 
Victims of telemarketing fraud are swindled out of more than $40 billion a year. According 
to one survey, 92 percent of U.S. adults say they have received postcards or letters promising 
they had “definitely” been awarded a “guaranteed” prize. Of those responding, 69 percent 
never received the promised prizes. Telemarketers select victims deliberately, targeting the 
elderly and the unemployed. Over 5.5 million Americans said they had bought items by 
telephone in the past two years and were exploited in the process. 
 
While the telephone, newspaper, and postal service used to be the key tools of telemarketers, 
the Internet has afforded fraudsters a more fast paced and anonymous method of carrying 
out their schemes. The number one scam to be currently found on the Internet, says the 
National Consumer League’s Fraud Watch (NCL), is the fake check scam, in which 
consumers are paid with a phony check for work or items sold and are instructed to wire 
money back. This has been the number one ranking telemarketing fraud for two years 
running. Advance fee scams and phishing also rank in the top 10 schemes on the World 
Wide Web. A discussion of some of the specific Internet schemes can be found in the 
“Computer and Internet Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual. 
 
Telemarketing offenses are classified as consumer fraud, yet many businesses are affected by 
office supply and marketing services scams. The hit-and-run nature of phone rooms, the 
geographical distances between the crooks and their victims, and the resources and priorities 
of law enforcement agencies all make enforcement efforts difficult. Only about one in 100 
victims ever files a complaint. 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1709 
NCLs Top 10 Telemarketing Frauds 
 
2008 Top 10 Frauds  
 
2009 Top 10 Frauds  
 
Fake Check Scams 61% Fake Check Scams 52% 
Prizes/Sweepstakes 12% Prizes/Sweepstakes 21% 
Phishing 10.5% Phishing 13% 
Advance Fee Loans/Credit Arrangers 2% Internet: General Merchandise 3% 
Lotteries/Lottery Ticket Clubs 2% Scholarships/Educational Grants 1% 
Internet: General Merchandise 1.5% Advance Fee Loans/Credit Arrangers  1% 
Magazines 1.5% Magazine Sales 1 
Scholarships/Educational Grants 1% Lotteries/Lottery Ticket Clubs 1% 
Office: Ad Space/Directory List ings 1% Telephone : Cramming .5% 
Credit Card Issuing .5% Business Opportunities/Franchises .5% 
 
Telemarketing Terminology 
Terms in the scammer’s vocabulary include banging, or  nailing, the customer, in other words, 
closing the deal. A salesperson’s most effective skill is puffing, the ability to sound convincing 
while exaggerating the value of a business opportunity or gift. To make the puffing more 
persuasive, marketers hire singers or criers to tell potential victims what a great deal they are 
getting. Calls from angry customers who realize they have been swindled are known as heat 
calls. These are handled by someone claiming to be the company’s manager or vice-president. 
 
Boiler Room Staff 
Work in a boiler room is shared by fronters, closers, and verifiers.  
 
Fronters
The fronter calls victims and makes the initial pitch. This low-level worker is usually 
breaking into the business and reads from a script to the prospective customer. Fronters 
seldom see the merchandise or know the full extent of the operation. Keeping fronters in 
the dark, at least in theory, limits what they can tell investigators and protects them in the 
event of prosecution. 
  
Closers 
The closer is a veteran. Fronters pass an interested caller to their closer, identified as the 
firm’s “manager,” who convinces the person to buy.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1710                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Verifiers 
Next, the caller is passed to a verifier, who reads some vague words about the deal and 
records the person’s agreement. These recordings are intentionally vague, leaving out the 
pitch and key details, essentially recording only the customer’s consent. Verifiers also stall 
customers who call back to complain (heat calls), finding reasons why a little more patience 
will solve the problem, and in some cases, convincing the person to send a little more money 
to help the process along. 
 
Staff Exploitation 
The customers of fraudulent telemarketing operations are not the only victims. Fronters are 
often poorly educated and easily taken advantage of by the career criminals who run the 
operations. Salespeople may face hidden costs in a work agreement, similar to the ones 
involved in the items they push on unsuspecting customers. For example, boiler room 
operators hold back parts of their phone lists and sell them to crew members as “hot leads.” 
Telescam veterans know how to operate a gift sting that bilks both the customer and the 
salesperson. Operators overstate the retail value of the gifts, so the customers get less than 
they paid for; then, by giving agents an inflated wholesale cost, the operators can pay these 
workers less commission, which is figured on the “profit margin” between wholesale  
and retail.  
 
The salespeople in boiler rooms are sometimes as desperate as their victims. Most are 
unemployed, with little education or marketable skills. Telemarketing promises easy work 
and big pay without any experience. Many pe ople who start out as fronters, however, are 
serving an apprenticeship in their criminal careers. They are wooed with cars, cellular 
phones, and other perks. Former workers have reported that supervisors sprinkled lines of 
cocaine along the phone bank table, and threw handfuls of money into the air, promising the 
proceeds to whoever made the next sale. 
 
Naturally, there are no Social Security or payroll taxes deducted from paychecks, so 
employees can owe big tax bills at the end of the year. Fronters’ commission payments are 
often shorted, or withheld. Paychecks frequently fail to clear the bank. Owners promise big 
profit shares for a month or two, then shut down the business. They tell the workers that 
their assets have been frozen by creditors or regulators. Workers lose their jobs and usually 
their last weeks’ commissions. For the last few months, however, the owners have been 
taking in $25,000 to $30,000 a week. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1711 
Telemarketing Suppliers 
The telemarketing industry relies on a number of sources to supply its phone scripts, mailing 
lists, merchandise, phone banks, and autodialers. Mailing lists and phone lists are sold for a 
few cents per name. Lists of people who have been stung before or who have bad credit 
records fetch between 10 and fifteen cents per name. By supplying telemarketers with the 
tools of their trade, these companies make telescamming possible. Many of the suppliers are 
aware of telemarketers’ criminal intentions and choose to ignore them.  
 
Turnkeys 
Turnkeys comprise an industry of their own by providing the collateral a telemarketing scam 
needs: turnkeys launder credit card receipts and checks, sell autodialers and phone lists, and 
provide the merchandise portrayed as valuable prizes.  
 
Legitimate businesses, however, are routinely implicated in this scurrilous industry. The U.S. 
Postal Service, for instance, carries tons of telemarketing ads. In the early days of the 
industry, telemarketers used the Postal Service to deliver merchandise C.O.D., but when the 
postal service mounted an aggressive campaign against fraud, companies turned to credit 
card billings to avoid the scrutiny. They also use parcel delivery services or overnighters, 
which are not subject to federal mail fraud laws. By keeping the value of the merchandise 
just below $300, telemarketers avoid the minimum amount at which postal inspectors are 
required to investigate fraud. 
 
Independent Service Organizations 
Telemarketers often have difficulty securing credit card services from reputable institutions. 
Many banks will not open credit-processing a ccounts for businesses who do a substantial 
amount of their business in phone sales because these accounts typically incur a high rate of 
chargebacks. Federal law gives consumers 60 days to protest charges to their cards, and if 
successful, the issuer has to absorb the loss. MasterCard and Visa estimate their losses from 
phone fraud at $300 million a year.  
 
Telemarketing operations have learned the difficulties they face when dealing directly with 
banks. To circumvent this obstacle, phone sales companies hire “independent service 
organizations,” which approach banks on the telemarketer’s behalf. The service company 
agrees with the bank to cover any chargebacks from the operation. The telemarketer is 
required to post a large bond to cover potential losses, so the service organization is also 
protected from loss. However, even with a half-million dollar bond, the reserve funds can be 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1712                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
quickly depleted when customers start to realize they have been swindled, leaving the service 
company and/or the bank with enormous losses.  
 
Factoring Companies 
Telemarketing operations also commonly engage factoring companies. These groups buy 
credit card receipts from telemarketing concerns at a discount, then use their merchant bank 
accounts to convert the receipts into cash. Some factors charge as much as 30 percent of the 
receipts’ gross value to launder the slips. Factoring is illegal in some states, though crooks 
find ways to slip through loopholes or disguise their alliances.  
 
International Factoring Companies 
Factoring through Asian and European merchants is becoming increasingly common. 
Factoring companies in these countries tend to charge a lower price for their services than 
some other countries—between nine and 10 percent of the gross. Regardless of their locale, 
factors have the opportunity to make a great profit. They also, however, face the risk that 
banks will freeze their accounts or sue them for excessive chargebacks. In response to the 
losses suffered at the hands of dishonest telemarketers, banks and credit card companies 
have started reviewing their accounts to locate those businesses with inordinate numbers of 
chargebacks. The financial institution closes these accounts, and may file suit if the account 
holder can be located. 
 
Check-Cashing Establishments 
Another convenient tool at the telemarketer’s disposal is the check-cashing store. If a boiler 
room operation wishes to avoid the risks of setting up a bank account that might be traced 
or seized, customers’ personal checks are taken to a company that cashes them for a small 
fee. These establishments rarely require any identification to cash the checks. Customers may 
complain and try to stop payment on their checks, but they are ordinarily too late.  
 
Common Telemarketing Scams 
Senior Scams 
Older people are the favorite prey of telescammers.  In the U.S., they make up 11 percent of 
the population but constitute 32 percent of the victims of consumer fraud and 50 percent of 
all phone scam victims. Forty-five percent of senior citizens have been offered investments 
by a person unknown to them. Seniors own more than half of all financial assets in the U.S. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1713 
Fred Schulte, author of Fleeced!, relates the pitch delivered to an elderly woman in 
Philadelphia by Tim O’Neil. The woman told detectives about the more than $10,000 for 
which O’Neil and his lieutenants swindled her. O’Neil’s call to mollify the woman’s protests 
was recorded by the FBI. On the line, he insists the “collectibles” the woman bought, 
including “actual bullets excavated from the Civil War,” are genuine and valuable.  
 
Do you wear pendants? This is a beautiful, is a diamond … I’m not gonna ask you to 
spend a penny … 
  
How old are you? God bless you … 89 … 
  
We’re gonna get that out to you … Look for it  in the middle of next week, and then give 
us a call and then let us know how you like it … 
 
Well I hope I put a little sunshine in your day. Okay, honey and God bless you. Oh don’t 
cry now, we’re here to take care of you … We’ll  be here and if you need to talk to anybody 
at any time you give us a call okay? Bye, bye, and God bless you. 
 
Telemarketers usually call in the evening. Nighttime calls find people of every age in more 
impulsive moods. Seniors may be more vulnerable to pitches promising them extra money 
and luxury goods because many live on fixed incomes. These lottery-style gambits can seem 
like an easy way for the elderly to improve their financial status.  
 
Targeting the Unemployed 
The unemployed are another favorite target for sweepstakes pitches and job search services. 
Whereas “the system” has left the jobless without hope, the telemarketer offers a way 
around official channels. People with bad credit pay telemarketers to “repair” their credit 
record or get a major card. Instead, they get a list of banks that offer credit cards, commonly 
published in newspapers, or an application for a card that requires a security deposit for 
activation, usually several hundred or a thousand dollars. These people are also targeted by 
advance-fee loan scams, which promise loans in exchange for a fee. 
 
Affinity Fraud 
Affinity fraud targets groups of people who have some social connection. Neighborhoods 
chiefly populated by racial minorities, especially immigrant groups, are often the site of 
affinity frauds. Religious and professional ties are often exploited. Marketing technology has 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1714                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
made it possible for a company to buy targeted lists, not just by location, but according to 
buying habits, leisure time activities, and club memberships. The most expensive lists carry 
the names of people who have already fallen for a telemarketing scam. This is called reloading.  
 
Chief among telescammers’ tricks is obfuscation. Salespeople read off lists of prizes, 
emphasizing big-ticket items like jewelry and cars, not mentioning that the odds of actually 
winning anything besides a trinket are astronomical. Schulte relates an incident in which 
victims were told they had won a Winnebago. Victims were asked to pay a handling fee of 
$2,900, a fraction of the cost of a new travel home. About two months later, victims found a 
delivery driver at their door with a Winnebago tent.  
 
Some operations actually encourage their marks to call and check with the Better Business 
Bureau (BBB) and with former customers, giving out the numbers for the person to call. 
These numbers ring at phony lines set up by the scammers, who give out a glowing 
recommendation. Phone rooms have been known to set up reference arms with titles like 
“The Better Business Bureau of America” or “International Better Business Bureau” to 
recommend their ventures. If a potential victim does reach the Better Business Bureau, 
chances are the report will contain little or nothing of use. The information in these files is 
usually ambiguous and out of date. 
 
Consolation 
When irate customers call telemarketers back to complain, their calls are routed to 
professionals who placate the caller with more promises and obfuscations. Some boiler 
rooms have a prearranged communication route for leading complaints through four or five 
different “departments.” This tactic causes many callers to eventually hang up without 
having spoken to anyone. In some instances, telemarketers confronted with furious callers 
threatening legal action do award something of value to the customer, though the item is 
usually worth far less than the person has paid. 
 
If obfuscation and consolation prizes fail to appease the caller, the con turns to threats and 
intimidation. This is a favorite method for dealing with senior citizens, especially elderly 
women. Threats are used not just to keep customers from filing complaints, but to cajole 
more money out of them. Some telemarketers have actually threatened callers’ personal 
safety if they refused to pay. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1715 
The odds in favor of catching a boiler room operation in progress are usually poor. 
Operations can select a town, set up a room, make their haul, and leave again in a matter of 
weeks or months. When authorities raid a boiler room, the operation has typically already 
moved on. If the company owners registered with state regulators, they probably did so 
under an alias. By the time police arrive, the perpetrators have moved on and the chances of 
finding them are slim.  
 
800 Numbers 
Toll-free 800 numbers (or other toll-free prefixes, such as 866, 877, or 888) offered by 
phone service companies are used by some operations. The scam is a toll-free line, 
advertised in mailers, fliers, and newspaper ads, to lure victims into making the call 
themselves. The toll-free number usually carries a recording that directs customers to a 900 
number that charges the caller between $3 and $10 a minute to hear recorded messages. A 
favorite device of sellers is to insist that the offer being made is good for less than 48 hours. 
To secure the opportunity, the customer hands over a cashier’s check to an overnight-delivery 
service. Even if the victim does have second thoughts, he will be unable to stop 
payment on a cashier’s check.  
 
Automatic Debits 
The personal checking account is one of the most convenient tools for defrauding 
telemarketing customers, thanks to advances in electronic banking technology. Using 
computerized transfers, businesses can set up an automatic debit to the buyer’s account. 
Telemarketing operations use this device to obtain payment before victims can change their 
minds about their purchases. Worse, telemarketers can simply use the information to drain 
the victim’s account. This information is usua lly obtained by telling the victim that the 
account numbers are needed to verify eligibility for a giveaway or business opportunity. 
Banks are not responsible for any losses customers suffer in this way, so there are no 
chargebacks and little recourse for the swindled customer besides filing a complaint. Even if 
an investigation of the complaint brings the scammer to court, the chances that the victim 
will receive restitution are poor. 
 
Business Opportunities (Biz Ops) 
Many telemarketing frauds are aimed at people starting their own businesses. Regulators put 
losses in fraudulent business opportunities at over $100 million a year, and most observers 
think the number is far higher.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1716                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Work-at-Home Schemes 
Besides franchise offers and other miscellaneous business scams, the most prevalent frauds 
involve work-at-home schemes and FCC-related investments. Victims of these phony 
offerings do not see themselves as part of the telemarketer’s prey. They believe they are 
making a legitimate business investment. 
 
Biz op promoters often use a team approach in their enterprises. The victim usually sees an 
ad and calls a fronter, who makes the introductory pitch and then passes the victim to a 
higher-up. Next, the caller is put through to a crier who endorses the opportunity and tells 
the victim of the profits he made. Finally, a closer seals the deal and gets the payment secured 
as quickly as possible.  
 
Telemarketers use business-related terms such as exclusive territory, annual gross revenues, and 
emerging markets in these calls. This helps convince the mark that the biz op is legitimate. A 
Louis Harris poll found that 1 in 33 cold calls for investments were successful. 
 
Some business-pitch operations are complete fabrications. They offer envelope stuffing or 
book-review enterprises that do not really exist. Scammers mail out postcards or buy cheap 
ads in magazines and newspapers. Some may not even take any phone calls. The ads 
convince the victims to send money to a mailbox. Unlike the U.S. Postal Service, which 
requires identification from renters and divulges this information to anyone who inquires, 
private companies will rent mail-drops to anyone for a few dollars a month and can refuse to 
say who paid for the box.  
 
Fly and Buy 
Some scams involve ventures such as vending machines, pay phones, and merchandise 
display racks. They often gain credibility by setting up a front operation and inviting 
investors for tours. This part of the ruse is known as the “fly and buy.” For example, the 
Securities Division of the State of Washington prosecuted a case on behalf of a woman who 
traveled to Colorado and met with a promoter. The promoter offered to let her in on a deal 
for video pool and video bowling games. Thrilled with the demonstration and her tour 
guide’s promises of quick profits, she paid $13,000 for machines that broke down in less 
than three months. When the woman complained to the promoter about the shoddiness of 
the machines, she was sent two new ones along with a bill. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1717 
Shoddy merchandise is a familiar element of the biz op scam. The scams are tailored for the 
targeted audience. A Maryland ring ran advertisements in Income Plus magazine and other 
investor-oriented publications for a solar-powered car battery recharger. “In seconds, you’re 
off and running,” the ad claimed. The offer stated that distributors were making over 
$200,000 a year with the revolutionary devices. But the machines were worthless. One 
investor took the recharger to an electrician, and was told it could recharge a battery but that 
it would take a few weeks.  
 
Vending Machine and Pay Phone Scams 
Buyers are promised exclusive territories, but find the same area has been sold to many 
people. Often, the machines do not work or they simply do not make any money. Sooner or 
later, the ruse is exposed. But in the short term, the operators can make substantial proceeds.  
 
Entrepreneurial Enterprises 
Telemarketers deal not only in machinery-oriented scams like those above. The raising of 
exotic animals like ostriches and emus for luxury items and for slaughter has been a popular 
scam for a while, including weekend retreats to a model farm for would-be ranchers. In the 
last 10 years, the 900 telephone number service has been used to swindle those who set out 
to be swindlers themselves. People are convinced they can make a fortune charging between 
$3 and $10 a minute for recorded messages providing entertainment, psychic readings, or 
information available for free from other sources. 
 
Scams involving computer technology are usually successful due to the layman’s lack of 
knowledge in that field. Although around 80 percent of American households own some 
type of computer, few actually understand the intricate details of how computers function. 
Whatever the nature of the opportunity, there are signs that indicate that it is not legitimate. 
Among the most common: 
• Classified ads urging the prospect to call an 800 number. 
• Wild, unsubstantiated claims about potential earnings. 
• Promises about exclusive territories, assurances about good locations, or the assistance 
of a professional locator. 
• References specified by the company. 
  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1718                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The lack of a complete disclosure document containing information about the 
promoter’s experience, lawsuit history, audited financial statements, and substantiation 
for earnings assertions. 
 
Inventions Schemes 
In order to crack down on operations that offer fraudulent invention promotions, the FTC 
recently launched “Project Mousetrap.” Using ads, these operations solicit inventors to 
submit their product ideas to the promotions firm, which supposedly specializes in bringing 
new products to the market. Inventions are supposedly evaluated and appraised, and nearly 
always endorsed. The firm offers to submit the product to manufacturers for a fee.  
 
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission charged the American Institute for Research and 
Development, Inc. (AIRD) and its predecessor, American Inventors Corporation (AIC), 
with running a deceptive inventions-promotion scheme that bilked consumers nationwide 
out of thousands of dollars each over a 20-year time span. Promoters used print ads, in-
 person, and telephone sales presentations to offer two basic services: (1) a “feasibility 
report,” priced from $250 to $495, to evaluate the patentability and marketability of the 
inventor’s product, and (2) a “representation ag reement” that promised to prepare, file, and 
prosecute a patent application, and to promote the product to industry representatives. The 
representation agreement cost from $5,490 to $11,990. The complaint alleged that the firms 
obtained design patents, which have little or no commercial value, instead of the utility 
patents they promised. Furthermore, people were told that only a select few inventions were 
accepted, when virtually every person who applied was brought into the program. AIRD and 
AIC also encouraged their customers to expect huge financial gains when, the Trade 
Commission charged, “in 20 years of business, perhaps no more than 13 customers have 
realized any financial gain at all” as a result of the companies’ services. 
 
Victims received a useless recommendation for their product and a coding from the U.S. 
Bureau of Standard Industrial Code (SIC). The code generates a list of manufacturers who 
make products similar to the inventors,’ but regulators say the “lists of manufacturers that 
come from classifying your idea with the SIC usually are of limited value.” Some victims 
thought they were securing a patent in their promotions deal, but instead received only a 
Disclosure Document from the U.S. Patent Office, available to the general public for $10. 
The document is not a patent but a statement of “evidence of the date of conception of the 
invention” and does not guarantee rights to any future products. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1719 
Employment Services 
The phony employment service is similar in nature to the biz op. Preying on the 
unemployed, these scams promise good jobs, many of them overseas with the added 
enticement of tax-free wages. Victims pay bet ween $250 and $1,000 for the service. Some 
get lists of government jobs, which are usually available for free, or listings from classified 
ads. Most get nothing.  
 
Credit Services 
The simplest credit scam promises that the company will secure a loan for the applicant, 
regardless of credit history and references, if the person pays an upfront fee, usually between 
$35 and $75. Checking account debits are a favorite payment method, as are 900 numbers, 
which charge by the minute (up to $40 or $50 per call) to hear information widely available 
that provides no help in swaying a loan for the listener. Usually there are few or no loans 
made. Occasionally, loan information and applications may be mailed out to the victim, but 
usually, after the fee has been paid, the operators are not heard from again.  
 
Credit Repair Scams 
Similar to loan scams are those that promise to repair credit. Pitch men like to say they can 
“wipe away” or “doctor” or “cosmeticize” blotches on credit, insinuating they have ways of 
changing or disguising a person’s credit history. Despite the fact that there is really no way to 
erase bad credit, many people fall for this scam, paying hundreds of dollars to expunge  
their records.  
 
Prime-Rate Credit Cards 
In this scam, telemarketing companies assure customers they can get major cards for a small 
fee even if their credit report is poor. Victims receive an application for a MasterCard, which 
they could obtain in any department store. Telemarketers also push secured cards, which 
require a cash deposit (usually a $250–$300 minimum) to the issuer’s bank to activate  
the card. 
 
Gold Cards  
A relatively new credit card sting on the Internet touts “gold card” status for customers, 
regardless of credit history. The advertisement claims applicants will be processed for a 
major credit card. In actuality, applicants are merely assisted in filing an application for a 
major credit card, a worthless service since applications are quite simple to complete and 
submit. For a large up-front fee, participants receive a “catalog card,” which is only 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1720                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
redeemable if the holder buys the company’s over-priced, low-quality merchandise listed in 
the catalog as discounted for cardholders. Even then, an actual purchase may require paying 
additional fees or cash deposits before the customer is allowed to charge the remainder. 
Since the issuers do not report payment activity to any of the credit reporting bureaus, using 
the card does not improve the customer’s credit rating. 
 
Lotteries/Lottery Clubs 
Consumers receive a false claim that they have won, or can get help to win, a lottery, often in 
a foreign country. Most lottery scams are perpetrated by con artists in other countries, 
sometimes using U.S. addresses to disguise their real locations. Sometimes the lottery 
actually exists, but invitations to play don’t come from governments that operate legitimate 
lotteries or anyone connected to them. The consumer has no way of assuring that they will 
receive the tickets that they pay for or, in the unlikely event that they do win, will ever be 
able to collect their money. Potential victims need to remember that it is illegal to use the 
mail or telephone to play lotteries across borders; U.S. law prohibits it, not only across 
national borders but state lines as well. The consumer could be accused of illegal activities 
just by participating. Differences in legal systems, difficulties of conducting investigations in 
other countries, and expenses and other complications involved in pursuing cross-border 
fraud make the chances of a consumer getting his money back very, very slim. 
 
Buyers Clubs 
This scheme involves membership in discount buying clubs that consumers never agreed to 
join or were signed up for through free-trial offers. Consumers should beware of 
advertisements for products at incredibly cheap prices or free if the consumer pays for 
shipping, these offers may be designed to lure the consumer into a buyer’s club membership. 
Another way to avoid being a victim of a buyer’s club scheme is to understand how a “trial-
 offer” works. In many cases, the consumer will automatically be charged for a membership 
when the free-trial expires unless they contact the club to cancel. The consumer should  
ask for the details of all membership offers in writing before they agree to join. If 
unauthorized charges or debits are noticed on monthly statements, the consumer should 
contact their credit card issuer or bank and ask for their account to be credited for these 
unauthorized charges. 
 
Travel/Vacation Schemes 
Offers of free or discount travel that never materializes. Consumers need to be skeptical of 
offers for “free” trips. Airlines and other well-known companies sometimes operate contests 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1721 
for travel prizes; however, there are also companies that offer “free” trips to try to lure 
people into buying their products or services. Consumers also need to know what is included 
with the trip; a “free” or incredibly cheap trip may have hidden costs. For instance, the 
cruise may be free, but the consumer has to pay to fly to the departure point and stay in a 
hotel at their own expense. Or they may have to endure a long, high-pressure sales pitch for 
a timeshare or travel club membership as part of the trip. Often the best travel deals are only 
available for off-peak times, not during school vacations, holidays, or other popular  
travel dates.  
 
To avoid being victims of travel/vacation schemes, consumers should confirm all travel 
arrangements. If transportation and hotel are included in the travel package, ask how to 
contact those companies and confirm with them directly that the reservations have been 
made. Consumers should do their own travel research; it’s easy to get information from a 
local travel agent or other sources such as newspapers, books, and the Internet. When 
making travel arrangements, it is advisable to pay with a credit card. Fraudulent travel 
operators can take a consumer’s money and run and even legitimate companies can go out 
of business. Paying with a credit card allows the consumer to dispute the charges if the 
promises that are made are not kept. 
 
Slamming 
Slamming occurs when a consumer’s telephone or electric service is switched from their 
current company to another one without their permission. Long distance is the most 
common target of telephone slamming, but it can also happen with local or local-toll service. 
Consumers should read the fine print on all contest entry forms, coupons, and other 
promotional materials as these might include an agreement to switch phone service. Federal 
law requires that written agreements to change phone service must be separate documents, 
not part of a prize package or other materials. If the company offers a check for the 
consumer to switch, the check must clearly state on the front and on the back, in the 
signature area, that the consumer is agreeing to change their service.  
 
Consumers should always check their phone bills carefully. If the consumer notices a new 
company name, he should call the number that’s  listed on that portion of the bill and ask for 
an explanation. If he has been slammed, he should inform the company that he did not agree 
to use its service. He should then contact his original phone company and ask to be 
reinstated to his old calling plan. Under federal law, the consumer can switch back for free 
and they don’t have to pay for the first 30 days of service from the slammer. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1722                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Real Estate 
Real estate scams are easily recognized. There is almost always an element of time pressure, 
with the victims being convinced they are participating in a “once-in-a-lifetime, now-or-
 never” deal. The investors are led to believe there is no time to investigate the venture, and 
that if they hesitate, they will miss the opportunity to make a fortune. Promises of big profits 
for little or no involvement are the norm in real estate scams. The investor is also misled into 
assuming they are being let in on a special offer or an exclusive deal by the promoter. 
 
Since the 1920s, when thousands of Americans bought swampland in Florida, real estate has 
served as a conduit for fraud. A modern-day variation has dispensed with the actual land 
entirely and simply sells information. Companies tout the riches available in real estate 
through seminars and books that claim to offer secret ways to cash in. The customer pays 
for the secret info and gets worthless tips in return.  
 
Timeshares 
Another scam sells timeshares in condominiums for vacationers. Telemarketers pass 
themselves off as brokers to condominium owners and purport to specialize in selling 
timeshares.  
 
OPTIONS 
Ads in the real estate section of newspapers coax investors into buying “options” on 
property. Supposedly, the option locks in a present-day price on behalf of the purchaser, 
who can exercise the option later if he wishes to buy the land or to sell it at a profit. 
Sometimes the investor has bought nothing but a piece of paper — the “agent” has no 
authority to make deals on the property. Occasionally, the option is only valid for a few 
months, or is too vaguely worded to be enforceable. Usually there is an actual plot of land, 
but in most instances it is undevelopable due to location or zoning restrictions, and is 
therefore worthless. 
  
DEVELOPED PROPERTY  
The General Development Corporation of Florida ran a legendary land fraud scam in which 
potential investors were shown lots and houses guaranteed to make them rich. In this 
rendering of the “buy-and-fly” sham, victims were shepherded, and their contracts restricted, 
until they signed a deal for a lot. The scam continued for approximately six years and cost 
victims millions. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1723 
Art/Rare Items 
Land deals prey on the public’s reverence for real estate. The con who deals in art objects 
preys on a similar impulse — the reverence for the rare. Paintings worth little more than their 
canvas and oil are tagged as “masterpieces” sure to grow in value. The victims who fall for 
these scams are art novices who seem to unquestioningly believe the “dealer’s” appraisal of 
the objet d’art. 
 
This sort of willing victim will buy lithographic prints, mass-produced by the thousands, 
thinking they are purchasing a “limited edition.” Any anxieties the victims may develop are 
calmed by a promised 30-day no obligation trial and with “certificates of authenticity.” 
According to the FTC, the most popular artists to counterfeit are Salvador Dali, Pablo 
Picasso, Marc Chagall, and Joan Miro. 
  
Collectibles and Memorabilia 
Collectibles and household decorative items such as vases, bric-a-brac, and figurines are also 
commonly hawked by telemarketers. Again, these supposedly valuable objects are nothing 
more than cheap, shoddy merchandise. War memorabilia is especially popular, particularly 
items related to the World War II. Documents and keepsakes from any bygone era are on 
the fraudulent telemarketer’s best-seller list. Stamps are sold as rare when they are in  
fact worthless.  
 
Coins are another prime money-maker for telemarketers. “Certificates of authenticity” and 
“appraisals” are included with the merchandise to reassure customers, but needless to  
say these documents are usually produced by the sales company, or doctored from a 
legitimate original. 
 
Precious Stones 
Gems are generally regarded as items that will not lose their value. Telescammers exploit this 
mindset by offering “high-quality” gems for wholesale prices. Customers are told they are 
being offered a special deal due to fluctuations in the market or because their names are on 
an industry list.  
 
The risk is minimal, victims are told. By acquiring the stones wholesale, the individual 
minimizes the investment exposure. The company even offers its own “brokerage” services, 
which can liquidate the stones at a moment’s notice should the investor need the cash back 
quickly. The stones not only have a grading certificate and appraisal documents, but are also 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1724                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
sealed in a plastic wrapper to guarantee that their condition remains flawless. The real 
purpose of the seal — which victims are told must not be broken if the gems are ever to be 
offered for sale — is to keep buyers from making a genuine inspection of the article.  
 
Once a victim makes a buy, a company spokesperson calls a second time, saying that if the 
person buys more stones, his “gemstone portfo lio” will be more attractive to prospective 
buyers and at auctions advertised in company literature. If the victim buys additional items, a 
company broker will inevitably call with “good news.” The brokerage will have found a 
buyer for the victim’s holdings, but before the transaction can go through, the customer 
must pay some “minor fees.” These may be passed off as finders’ fees, brokers’ 
commissions, examination fees, international duties, or taxes. There may be a provision 
requiring the victim to buy more stones before making the sale. 
 
A variation on the scheme targets those who have already bought gems from telemarketers 
and whose names are taken from insider lists. The caller claims to be a broker representing 
an “overseas buyer” ready to purchase the listener’s portfolio. But, invariably, the buyer must 
have a few more stones in the portfolio—which the caller offers to supply—in order to 
make the sale, and there are fees and commissions to be paid. 
  
Precious Metals 
The precious metals market has traditionally been one of wide variances. Prices fluctuate 
constantly and even experts have trouble deciding what the next trend will be. Telemarketing 
operations play on this instability with offerings of gold, silver, and platinum. Once again, 
victims are told prices will never be this good again and that if they hesitate, they will miss a 
singular opportunity to make a fortune. 
 
900 Numbers/800 Numbers/International Calls 
900 numbers are usually associated with psychic hotlines, phone sex lines, and other dubious 
enterprises. Using 900 numbers, customers can “dial a prayer” or even listen to the Easter 
Bunny. Some callers insist they did not know they were being charged for the service. By 
using a toll-free 800 number that then links the caller to the per-minute charges, promoters 
are able to surreptitiously begin charging customers for calls. 800 numbers are often used as 
a front in telemarketing operations to lead consumers to think that a call is free, when in fact 
there are hidden charges everywhere. A particularly vicious combination uses a toll-free 
number to make a presentation about communication services. Once the caller dials in, the 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1725 
computerized service automatically puts a monthly charge, sometimes labeled “voicemail,” 
on the caller’s phone bill.  
  
Many operations familiar to law enforcement as  traditional boiler rooms moved into the toll 
numbers when they became widely available in the 1980s. Victims dial in, thinking they will 
receive information on claiming funds from abandoned bank accounts or inheritances from 
long lost relatives. Credit repair offers and advance-fee loan services use 900 numbers 
extensively. Sweepstakes and prize give-aways are promoted this way, as are employment 
services, real estate education, information on government programs and auctions, and biz 
ops of every kind. The latest ruse uses a 900 number to convince people to invest in the 900 
number business.  
 
International Calls 
An off-shore version of the 900 number scam uses international phone companies to reap 
big dollars. Callers believe they are dialing an international number for free information, 
usually about travel contests, discount fares, or overseas jobs. But the phone numbers, in 
Guyana and the Caribbean, charge up to $2.30 per minute for a recorded message that runs 
for 15 minutes. The promoters get a kickback from the phone company; in one case, 37 
cents per minute went to the scammers.  
 
Selling Free Information 
Companies involved in this kind of scheme take out ads in newspapers and magazines, or 
buy spots on talk radio, promising they can locate government jobs, get deals on liquidated 
equipment, or find student loans. All this information is available cheaply or free to the 
public, through government offices, on the Internet, and from other sources. One need only 
know where to look.  
  
Scholarship Services 
Maybe the most widely broadcast offering in the info racket is the college scholarship locator 
service. Student Aid Inc., a New York city firm, provides an example. SAI guaranteed 
students and their parents that for a $97 fee they would receive at least $1,000 in 
scholarships or grants. “In reality,” government  prosecutors showed, “the defendants almost 
never obtained scholarship money for consumers.” SAI used a common clause in its 
contracts to keep from paying refunds “requiring students [to] produce letters of rejection 
from every scholarship on their search list even though the list included scholarships whose 
deadlines had passed or for which the students did not qualify.”  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1726                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Whatever information scholarship services do provide is available for little or nothing (at 
most, a $5 or $10 fee) from legitimate institutions. The perpetrators imply that they have 
insider connections, or that they actually administer the dispersal of monies, when in reality 
they merely provide lists of scholarships offered by foundations and universities. 
  
In most cases, information scams sell freely available material. There is also a version that 
does offer the information for free but sticks a charge on anyway. The International Call 
scam promises “free information” on travel contests and discount fares. The information 
itself does not cost anything, but the call to get it costs from $3 to $6 a minute for a 15-
 minute call.  
 
Charity Fronts  
An increasing number of groups calling themselves non-profit, charitable concerns are not 
what they appear. Very little or no money goes to the advertised cause. Police and firemen’s 
associations have in some cases lent their names to telemarketing fund drives that only give 
about 35 percent of their collections to the group. Some boiler room operators claim to call 
for these groups—or for drives against a dise ase or underprivileged children—when they are 
in no way affiliated with the charity.  
  
A twist to this scam is the impersonation of handicapped workers by boiler room operators. 
Phone pros call victims, claiming to be handicapped or disabled, and attempt to sell light 
bulbs and other household products. The merchandise is priced at three times its actual 
value. The money is, of course, pocketed by the operators. 
 
Door-to-Door Promotions 
Sweepstakes promoters using a charity front offer the possibility of new cars and cash prizes 
to contributors. The raffle approach — tying the number of “chances” to a set amount —
helps drive up how much the victim is willing to give. A favored device of phony charities is 
to send school-age children door-to-door, saying they are raising money for antidrug 
programs or for a group that takes underprivileged kids on trips. Some of the children repeat 
what they are told in exchange for a few dollars. Others believe they will receive rewards and 
free trips when in fact they, too, are being scammed.  
 
Prizes, Sweepstakes, Discount Services 
The most common give-away is known as the “1-in-5.” A postcard arrives in the mail telling 
the receiver they have already won a prize. A new luxury vehicle tops the list, along with 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1727 
$5,000 in cash, a diamond necklace, a living room set, and $500 in gift certificates for 
clothing and household furnishings. The odds of winning any of the prizes are astronomical. 
Victims are given trinkets or coupons redeemable only for the company’s own  
shoddy merchandise. 
 
Winners who call back are often asked to stipulate how they intend to spend their winnings 
for the company’s “records,” or for “publicity materials.” Then they will be asked to pay a 
processing fee or to prepay the taxes on their winnings. Sometimes winners pay immediately 
by dialing a 900 number that charges them for a 10-minute call even if they hang up 
immediately. This practice is a further violation of telemarketing laws, which require a toll 
number to disconnect within 30 seconds after the caller hangs up.  
 
Magazine Subscriptions 
A productive front for prize hawkers is the magazine subscription service. Prepaid 
subscription offers extract money from customers through credit cards and bank debits, 
then never deliver the publication. In other instances, the processing fees far exceed the 
actual value of the subscriptions.  
  
Office and Household Supplies 
A scam that has recently become prevalent involves copy machine toner. An invoice for 
toner is sent to a company. The cons have usually called beforehand, gotten the name of the 
employee in charge of supplies, and addressed the invoice to that person. Although the 
office never ordered or received any toner, the con men are relying on poor communication 
to cover their ruse. The invoice will most likely be sent to the accounting department and 
paid. If the proper controls are in place at every level of business operations, this scheme 
should be detected. Too many businesses, however, are vulnerable to this kind of scam. 
 
The caller may get the company’s representative to accept a trial or promotional shipping of 
the product. He may claim to be a supplier for the company or a new salesman from a 
regular supplier. The product arrives and an invoice follows a couple of weeks later. If the 
company tries to send the product back, it is returned to them. To avoid further 
complications, the company will normally pay the bill just to put an end to the situation. 
 
Any sort of office supply, from paper to shelving to cleaning products, can be part of a 
scam. Medical supplies shipped to doctor’s offices and clinics are pushed in a similar fashion. 
Individual households can be the target of these ploys, as well. Water purifiers are often used 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1728                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in tandem with giveaway offers; the victim buys a filtering device, at an inflated cost, in order 
to qualify for the giveaway. Pyramid-style operations often use household products and 
health-related merchandise, such as vitamins or skin cream, as part of their machinations. 
 
Phishing 
Phishing is a popular scheme that involves tricking businesses or individuals into providing 
passwords, account numbers, or other sensitive data by claiming to be from an actual 
company the victim does business with. A solicitation for information appears to come from 
a legitimate business and can occur over the phone (such as a call from the victim’s “bank” 
saying their account has been compromised and requesting PIN numbers, account numbers, 
or passwords), or via e-mail (which is the most common technique). An individual receives 
an e-mail that appears to come from eBay, PayPal, or a financial institution. The e-mail states 
that the customer must immediately log into his account in order to update his information. 
The link directs the individual to a fake site that captures his identifying information such as 
Social Security numbers and PIN, mothers’ maiden name, and financial account numbers. 
 
It is crucial for people to recognize phishing so that they don’t fall victim to it:  
• Phishing occurs mostly by e-mail. As described above, the sender of the e-mail pretends 
to be a legitimate bank, government agency, or retailer and asks the recipient to confirm 
his personal information for any of these or other made-up reasons: the person’s 
account will be closed if they don’t give the information, an order has been placed in 
their name, or their information has been lost because of a computer glitch. Don’t ever 
respond to these e-mails. Legitimate banks, government agencies, and retailers would not 
e-mail you for your password of other identifying information.  
• Do not click on any link in an e-mail that asks for your personal information. The links 
included in the e-mails sent by phishers will take you to a phony website that looks just 
like the website of the real company or agency. If you followed the instructions, you 
would enter your personal information, which would go straight into the hands of 
identity thieves.  
• Ironically, phishers may even say that they are from the fraud departments of popular 
companies and ask you to verify your information because they suspect you may be a 
victim of identity theft. Other tactics include the phisher claiming to be from a state 
lottery commission who requests people’s banking information to deposit their 
“winnings” in their accounts. Again, never disclose any personal information via e-mail. 
• Phishing can also happen by phone. Verify caller’s identity and contact their company 
for legitimacy. Instead of fraudsters sending spam, they might call you and pretend to be 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1729 
from a company or government agency, making the same kinds of false claims and 
asking for your personal information. If someone contacts you and says that you have 
been a victim of fraud, verify the person’s identity before you provide any personal 
information. Legitimate credit card issuers and other companies may contact you if there 
is an unusual pattern indicating that someone else might be using one of your accounts. 
However, they only ask if you made particular transactions; they don’t request your 
account number or other personal information. Law enforcement agencies might also 
contact you if you’ve been the victim of fraud. To be on the safe side, ask for the 
person’s name, the name of the agency or  company, the telephone number, and the 
address. Then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitimate. 
• Phishers also target people who list themselves on job search sites. They pretend to be 
potential employers and ask for your Social Security number and other personal 
information. Before giving anyone your personal information, follow the above advice 
and make sure to verify the person’s identity. 
• Be suspicious if contacted unexpectedly and asked for your personal information. It is 
difficult to determine a company’s legitimacy by  reading an e-mail, going to a website, or 
talking to someone on the phone. If you’re contacted unexpectedly and asked to give out 
your personal information, a red flag should go up that something is “phishy.” 
Legitimate companies and agencies do not operate this way. 
• Act immediately if you’ve been hooked by a phisher. If you provided account numbers, 
PINs, or passwords to a phisher, notify the companies with whom you have the 
accounts right away. For information about how to put a “fraud alert” on your files at 
the credit reporting bureaus and other advice for ID theft victims, contact the Federal 
Trade Commission’s ID Theft Clearinghouse, www.consumer.gov/idtheft or toll-free, 
877-438-4338.  
 
SMiShing or Tishing  
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message via 
SMS (the protocol used to used transmit text mess ages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen  as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take  
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1730                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Voice Phishing or Vishing 
Vishing is a form of phishing attack where e-mails, for one reason or another, direct 
recipients to dial a 1-800 number, where an automated recording requests that callers enter 
personal information using a touch-tone phone.  
 
Pharming
Pharming is an attack in which a user is fooled into entering sensitive data (such as a 
password or credit card number) into a malicious website that impersonates a legitimate 
website. It is different from phishing in that the attacker does not have to rely on having the 
user click on a link in the e-mail to direct him to the fake website. Pharming actually exploits 
a vulnerability in the DNS server software that allows a hacker to acquire the domain name 
for a site and redirect the website traffic from a legitimate site to a false one. So even though 
the user types in the correct website address, the pharming program sends the user to an 
illegitimate site that looks like the real thing. Unknowingly, the user is then providing 
passwords and information directly to the hacker. 
 
Recovery Rooms 
Recovery room operations target those who have already lost money to a telemarketing 
scam. Posing as a consumer advocacy group or a law firm, telemarketers offer victims a 
chance to recover any funds they may have lost and bring the perpetrators to justice. Once 
the victim agrees, legal, investigative, and other fees will begin to emerge.  
 
 
Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes 
 
Definition 
A Ponzi scheme is generally defined as an illegal business practice in which new investors’ 
money is used to make payments to earlier investors. A simple investment scam rakes in as 
much money as possible and then disappears. A Ponzi stays in business by turning some of 
the money back into the game. A few conspicuous rewards early on will whip up interest, the 
business will grow, and then, if they’re smart and lucky, the operators will split. 
 
Everyone involved pretends to mount a legitimate organization, but little or no commercial 
activity takes place. Payoffs are made from the pool of investor funds; the rest is siphoned 
into operators’ pockets. Schemes may run for at least a year. Some Ponzis have flourished 
for a decade or more.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1731 
In accounting terms, money paid to Ponzi investors, described as income, is actually  
distribution of capital. It’s like giving away the store. Instead of sharing profits, you’re sharing 
cash reserves. 
 
Approaching this crime analytically we can see into the mechanics of the fraud. Illegal cash is 
hidden in securities or other financial instruments. Promoters use phony accounts, phony 
books, and phony names. Successful prosecutions have to uncover these guises and track the 
funds. Plus, the inner workings of a Ponzi operation have to be summarized for a jury, 
whose members are probably not mathematicians or accountants.  
 
Madoff and Stanford: Ponzi Rises Again 
In early 2009, Ponzi schemes became headline news when Bernard “Bernie” Madoff pleaded 
guilty to a $50 billion Ponzi scheme, the largest in U.S. history, and R. Allen Stanford was 
charged with running an $8 billion dollar Ponzi:  
 
 
Bernard “Bernie” Madoff 
 
Introduction 
On December 11, 2008, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents arrested Bernard 
“Bernie” Madoff, a 70-year-old businessman and former chairman of the NASDAQ 
stock market, and charged him on a single count of securities fraud. According to the 
charging document, the arrest came after Madoff told two senior employees — later identified 
as his sons — that his investment advisory business was “basically, a giant Ponzi scheme,” 
estimating that investors lost approximately $50 billion in his fraud. Federal prosecutors, 
however, put the amount at $64.8 billion.  
 
Background 
Before his arrest, Madoff enjoyed a sterling reputation, recognized as a financial 
mastermind. In 1960, Madoff founded his investment company, Bernard L. Madoff 
Investment Securities LLC, with $5,000 he earned from his jobs as a lifeguard and a 
sprinkler installer. The business eventually became one of the five broker/dealers that 
helped create the NASDAQ stock exchange, which Madoff later chaired, and established 
itself as one of the top market maker businesses on Wall Street (the sixth largest in 2008).  
Madoff was also a widely respected philanthropist, devoting his time and wealth to 
numerous charitable causes. He not only established his own multimillion-dollar private 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1732                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation that donated money to educational, cultural, and health charities, he also served 
on the boards of several nonprofit institutions. 
 
Madoff’s Investment Scheme 
Even though it is not clear when Madoff’s investment fraud began (federal investigators 
believe the fraud may have begun in the 1970s while Madoff himself stated that it began in 
the 1990s), it is clear that Madoff’s unusually consistent returns, showing annualized 
returns from eight to twelve percent, were not the result of his investment strategy.    
 
Before his confession, Madoff claimed that he generated the steady returns by employing a 
“split-strike conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that 
involves a combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to 
generate predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely 
correlated to an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put 
options on the same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay  clients who requested 
withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds from 
new investments to pay them off.   
 
How Madoff Made It Happen 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, which collapse in a few years as withdrawals exceed deposits, 
Madoff’s con lasted longer, spread farther, and caused more losses than any similar scheme 
in history. Understandably, the Madoff case raises the question, “How did Madoff fool so 
many people for so long?” Of course, there is  no single answer to explain the success of 
Madoff’s scheme, but there are several factors that contributed to its unusual prosperity, 
including his ability to attract new investors, maintain stability, and avoid detection. These 
are explored in the following sections. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1733 
Attracted New Investors  
Madoff’s ability to attract new investors is one reason for his scheme’s success. For years, 
Madoff’s scheme did not collapse because he successfully raised enough money from new 
investors to keep paying returns. Several factors contributed to Madoff ’s ability to entice 
new investors. Most significantly, reports of solid, long-term, and low-risk returns, 
regardless of the market environment, lured new investors through a false sense of security. 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, Madoff did not promise extraordinary returns. Instead, he 
promised stability and long-term profits. In other words, Madoff attracted new investors by 
avoiding the appearance of risk.  
 
Similarly, his reputation and professional stature provided comfort to his investors. As a 
major figure in NASDAQ, a pioneering market maker, and a government advisor on 
market issues, Madoff’s résumé was exceptional. Madoff also enjoyed a longstanding 
reputation as a modest and humble individual, a man who put his family first and donated 
much of his time and money to several charitable causes. 
 
Moreover, Madoff lured new investors by promoting secrecy and exploiting the complexities 
inherent to the industry. Madoff emphasized secrecy by keeping his investors and investment 
strategies from the general public, which created a sense of exclusivity and an enigmatic 
enticement in his investment accounts. Additionally, Madoff understood that the complex 
and cryptic nature of the securities industry caused investors to feel that it is a discipline for 
people who are much smarter, and he exploited this by marketing his split-strike conversion 
investment method as “too complicated for outsiders to understand.” These characteristics 
allowed Madoff to shift investors’ fears from the risk of losing money to the risk that they 
might miss out on making money, creating an environment ripe for fraudulent practices. 
 
Maintained Stability  
In addition to attracting new investors, some experts suggest that Madoff successfully 
avoided large, unexpected withdrawals that would lead to the collapse of his scheme by 
targeting wealthy individuals and charities. Since the wealthy feel any economic downturn 
last and least, such investors provided Madoff with the money he needed to keep his scheme 
going. Similarly, Professor Mitchell Zuckoff, author of Ponzi’s Scheme: The True Story of 
a Financial Legend, argues that “[b]y targeting charities, Madoff could avoid the threat of 
sudden or unexpected withdrawals.” Zuckoff says that charitable foundations are legally 
required to spend only five percent of their funds each year and that this low rate of 
withdrawals allowed Madoff’s scheme to avoid detection as long as he attracted new 
investors.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1734                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A voided Detection  
Despite multiple SEC investigations and allegations of fraud beginning as early as 1999, 
Madoff’s investment scheme continued without detection. There are several reasons for this. 
In particular, he constructed his investment business to avoid most regulatory oversight and 
other checks and balances. Although private investment pools, such as hedge funds, are 
subject to limited oversight, Madoff’s firm was a different kind of entity. Unlike private 
investment pools, which use an outside brokerage firm to execute their trades, Madoff’s firm 
was a broker/dealer with an asset-management division, allowing the firm to process all of 
its own trades. Similarly, while most private investment pools typically keep their client 
funds or securities with an external custodian, Madoff’s firm kept its funds in-house. 
Essentially, these practices helped keep his activities hidden from view.  
 
Madoff also avoided the obligation to use a PCAOB-registered auditor by structuring his 
firm as a privately held broker/dealer. This allowed his firm to use an unknown auditing 
firm with only three employees (one of whom was a 78-year-old living in Florida) and no 
other large Wall Street clients.  
 
Equally important is that Madoff avoided filing required disclosures of his firm’s holdings 
with the SEC. Madoff did this by saying that his firm sold all of its holdings for cash at 
the end of every reporting period.  
 
In addition to operating his business on the outskirts of regulation, Madoff avoided 
detection by discouraging the use of prudent investor tools like due diligence, audit 
statements, and understanding of investment strategy. Notably, evidence shows that Madoff 
kicked some investors out of his funds for asking too many questions. Likewise, Madoff 
reportedly shunned questions from investment media about his strategy, and, as noted 
above, Madoff conducted his investment business with great secrecy and even refused to 
provide clients with online access to their accounts.  
 
Red Flags 
With the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flags in Madoff’s investment advisory 
business, and if nothing else, the Madoff saga can provide some simple lessons to help 
identify and prevent similar Ponzi schemes. The most apparent red flags are discussed 
below.  
 
Steady Returns  
The most obvious red flag was that Madoff’s firm generated consistently steady, positive 
returns during his seventeen-year track record, with no down year and very few negative 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1735 
months, regardless of market conditions. And even though Madoff attributed this to his 
split-strike conversion investment strategy, a technique that can generate profits over many 
years, this type of strategy will generate some down months and exhibit more volatility than 
Madoff’s reported returns. In other words, Madoff’s profits were too good to be true. 
 
Extreme Secrecy and Lack of Transparency  
Madoff’s secrecy and lack of transparency in the operations of his business and investment 
process provided yet another red flag. As disc ussed above, reports indicate that Madoff was 
extremely secretive regarding his investment strategy. Specifically, Madoff never clearly 
defined his split-strike conversion strategy, which other traders could not duplicate, and he 
refused to answer questions ab out his investment strategies. In addition, Madoff did not 
provide his clients with a high level of detail  in their monthly statements and refused to 
provide online access to their accounts. 
 
Madoff also kept information from other employees at his firm. According to a senior 
employee, Madoff “kept the financial statements for the firm under lock and key” and was 
“cryptic” about his investment advisory busin ess, which he operated from a separate floor, 
when discussing it with other employees. 
 
Lack of Job Segregation  
The lack of job segregation was another red flag that should have raised concerns about 
Madoff’s operations. Unlike typical hedge funds that use a network of third-party service 
providers to perform certain functions, Madoff’s firm performed these operations internally 
and with no third-party oversight. A hedge fund’s network of third-party service providers 
typically includes an investment manager to manage the assets, a broker (or brokers) to 
manage the trades, a fund administrator, and a custodian/prime broker. These third 
parties provide essential checks and balances necessary to protect individuals and 
institutions. Madoff’s firm, on the other hand, performed these functions internally. Madoff 
not only traded his managed accounts in-house by operating as a broker/dealer, he also 
maintained custody of his clients’ assets, indicating that there was no independent custodian 
to verify the existence of assets.  
 
Small Accounting Firm  
One of the most significant red flags was the firm’s unknown auditor, Friehling & 
Horowitz, a firm that employed  only three people. Clearly, it seems inconceivable that a 
three-person operation could adequately audit a firm of Madoff’s size and complexity. 
Furthermore, the accounting firm had only one active accountant, David Friehling, who 
had not registered with the PCAOB, an independent agency that was created under the 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1736                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sarbanes-Oxley Act to help detect fraud. Similarly, the firm was not peer reviewed, a 
process in which audit organizations assess each other for internal quality control. 
According to the AICPA, the accounting firm was not required to participate in any peer 
reviews because Friehling informed the group that the firm had not conducted audits for 15 
years.   
 
On March 18, 2009, Friehling became the second person charged in the fraud scandal. 
According to federal prosecutors, Friehling was charged with securities fraud, aiding and 
abetting investment-advisor fraud, and for filing false audit reports to the SEC.   
 
Unusual Fee Structure  
The structure of the firm’s compensation also raised red flags. Unlike most hedge funds, 
which charge management and performance fees, Madoff’s firm earned commissions on each 
trade. This unusual fee structure raised many  questions. Why would the firm not act like a 
hedge fund and profit from big gains? Why would it let third-party distributors get these 
fees? 
 
Tips from More than One Source  
Finally, outside analysts raised critical questions about Madoff’s firm for years. For 
example, in 2001, an article that appeared on the MARHedge website, titled “Madoff 
Tops Charts: Skeptics Ask How,” seriously  questioned Madoff’s ability to deliver 
incredibly consistent returns. A subsequent Barron’s article titled “Don’t Ask, Don’t 
Tell” raised the same concerns, noting that  “some on Wall Street remain skeptical about 
how Madoff achieves such stunning double-digit returns.”  
 
Still, the most notable critique came from independent fraud investigator Harry 
Markopolos, CFE, CFA. In 1999, Markopolos started a campaign to persuade the 
SEC that Madoff’s returns could not be legally generated using the investment strategies 
that he claimed to use. Despite receiving little attention, Markopolos continued to send 
SEC officials information about Madoff, and, in 2005, Markopolos presented the SEC 
with a 17-page memo titled “The world’s largest hedge fund is a fraud.” In the memo, 
Markopolos outlined 29 red flags in Madoff’s business dealings and argued that Madoff 
was either front-running client orders or operating “the world’s largest Ponzi scheme.” This 
time, the SEC responded to Markopolos’s tips and initiated an investigation. 
Unfortunately, the investigation did not uncover any evidence of a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Finally, several financial institutions, including Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Credit 
Suisse Group AG, either refused to do business with Madoff or advised their customers 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1737 
against it. In fact, Goldman Sachs blacklisted Madoff’s firm after it failed to pass their 
standards of due diligence.  
 
Conclusion 
In 2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, 
one count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He 
was sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion 
dollars (the amount prosecutors say flowed through his business). Given the size, scope, and 
complexities involved in the fraud, the process of unraveling Madoff’s web of financial 
dealings could take years, and the full extent of the damage caused by his scheme may never 
be known.  
 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Stanford International Bank, et al. 
R. Allen Stanford, a prominent financier, philanthropist, and sponsor of sports teams, had 
been on the radar of regulators for years thanks to the oddly stable and generous returns 
offered by his firm’s certificates of deposit. But recently, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), perhaps inspired by Madoff’s alleged $50 billion Ponzi scheme, took 
a renewed interest in Stanford and his operations. On February 27, 2009, the SEC filed 
a complaint alleging that Stanford, three of his companies, and two of his executives carried 
out a “massive Ponzi scheme” for at least a decade, involving billions of dollars of investor 
funds. 
 
The Parties  
Plaintiff  
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
 
Defendants  
Stanford International Bank, Ltd. (SIB) 
Stanford Group Company (SGC)—Investment adviser to SIB 
Stanford Capital Management, LLC ( SCG)—Investment adviser to SIB 
R. Allen Stanford (Stanford)—Chairman, chief executive officer, and sole shareholder of 
the Stanford operations 
James M. Davis (Davis)—Director and chief financial officer of SFG and SIB 
Laura Pendergest-Holt (Pendergest-Holt)—C hief investment officer of SFG and a 
member of SIB’s investment committee 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1738                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Relief Defendants  
Stanford Financial Group (SFG) 
The Stanford Financial Gr oup Bldg Inc. (SFGB) 
 
The Allegations 
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a number of allegations against the 
defendants in its First Amended Complaint filed on February 27, 2009 with the U.S. 
District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division. These allegations 
include: 
 
• Stanford and Davis misappropriated billions of dollars of investor funds and 
falsified SIB’s financial statements in an effort to conceal their Ponzi scheme. 
• Pendergest-Holt facilitated the scheme by misrepresenting to investors that she 
managed SIB’s multi-billion investment portfolio of assets and employed a sizable 
team of analysts to monitor the portfolio. 
• SIB sold approximately $8 billion of certificates of deposit (CDs) through 
deceiving investors about the security of the CDs and the assets in which the bank 
was investing. 
• Stanford and Davis “invested” an undetermined amount of investor funds in 
speculative, unprofitable private businesses controlled by Stanford. 
• Stanford and Davis fabricated the performance of SIB’s investment portfolio in 
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor funds flowing in; the fabricated 
financial information in no way revealed the true performance of the bank’s 
investment portfolio. 
• SGC and SCM advisers used materially false and misleading historical 
performance data to sell more than $1 billion of a proprietary mutual fund wrap 
program, generating fees for SGC and SCM in excess of $25 million. 
• The Defendants violated or aided and abetted violations of the Securities Act of 
1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Investment Advisors Act of 
1940, and the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
 
The Red Flags 
Despite being such an opaque operation, operating in a minimally regulated jurisdiction, 
and offering suspiciously stable returns on its investments, SIB did an excellent job of 
attracting investors and fielding regulators for quite some time. And whether or not 
Stanford is guilty of running the alleged $8 billion Ponzi scheme remains to be seen. But 
regardless of the outcome of the case, one cannot deny the existence of a number of warning 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1739 
signs indicative of a Ponzi scheme or other investment fraud. The red flags discussed below 
should have had investors and regulators intrigued, if not downright apprehensive. 
 
Impressive, Yet Oddly Stable, Returns  
SIB purported to achieve double-digit returns on its investments for the past 15 years. Not 
only were the returns oddly stable, but they were quite impressive, especially for such a 
“liquid” investment, often more than double the returns offered by big banks. For example, 
the interest rate offered by SIB in February 2009 on a one-year CD (requiring a $50,000 
minimum investment in the United States) was approximately 4.5%, according to the 
bank’s website, while Bankrate.com reported the average interest rate offered by U.S. 
banks to be about 2%. Even more interesting is that despite massive losses in the stock 
market and hedge funds in 2008, SIB claimed to experience a loss of only 1.3% for that 
period and continued to pay out above-average returns.  
 
Opaque Investment Strategy  
There was a stunning lack of transparency into the investment strategy used by SIB. The 
bank claimed to generate its impressive returns by investing the CD money largely in 
corporate stocks, real estate, hedge funds, and precious metals, but offered few specifics, even 
in its annual report. SIB’s strategy is a bit unusual, as most issuers of CDs invest CD 
money in higher-yielding U.S. Treasury bonds or similarly conservative instruments. 
Marketing materials claimed that the bank was able to offer substantially higher returns as 
a result of investing in a “well-diversified portfolio of highly marketable securities issued by 
stable governments, strong multinational companies, and major international banks,” and 
also as a result of Antigua’s low taxes and moderate overhead costs. 
 
Incredibly Small Auditing Firm  
The 14-person Antigua-based accounting firm, C.A.S. Hewlett & Co., seemed grossly 
inadequate to audit the books of a bank that claims to manage and advise $50 billion in 
investor funds — but that’s who Stanford relied upon for his auditing needs. 
 
Inbred Governance Structure  
The independence and objectivity of the bank’s board of directors were questionable given 
that the seven-member board was dominated by Stanford insiders, family, and friends. 
 
Very High Level of Spending  
Although selling CDs is typically a low-margin business, Stanford was able to offer much 
higher than average compensation to brokers, including large bonuses, luxury cars, and 
expensive vacations. Stanford’s empire was also known to spend vast sums of money on its 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1740                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
many offices. Additionally, Stanford’s companies were a big corporate sponsor of 
professional sports teams and charitable causes, and they contributed heavily to political 
campaigns.  
 
Unusual Background of Chief Investment Officer  
The qualifications of Pendergest-Holt, the chief investment officer of SFG and a member of 
SIB’s investment committee, are insufficient to explain her meteoric rise to the top of 
Stanford’s empire. She did not have a business school degree, nor did she have any 
experience as an analyst at a Wall Street firm or large mutual fund company. All of her 
training was received on the job while working for Stanford. 
 
Concerns Voiced by a Number of Former Brokers/Employees  
Over the years, there have been a number of  grievances (including lawsuits and public 
arbitration cases) aired against SFG and SIB by former employees and brokers, including 
claims that the firms were running a Ponzi or pyramid scheme, claims that 
employees/brokers were dismissed for objecting to and raising concerns about the legality of 
the firms’ practices, claims that the firms used  investor money to finance its brokerage arm, 
and claims that the firms misled investors by offering artificially high yields on their CDs.  
 
Revocation of Banking License in Montserrat  
Prior to Stanford International Bank, Stanford operated Guardian International Bank 
(which also issued questionable CDs) in the British territory of Montserrat in the 
Caribbean. But in 1991, after the local government moved to revoke Guardian’s banking 
license under hazy circumstances, Stanford relocated to Antigua and renamed his bank 
Stanford International Bank.  
 
At the time of this writing, the only charges against Stanford and Davis were civil fraud 
charges. Pendergest-Holt, however, had been arrested by federal prosecutors and charged 
with criminal obstruction of justice (to which she pleaded innocent) for giving misleading 
statements to SEC investigators. Perhaps prosecutors hope to secure a quick guilty plea 
from her, so that, with a plea deal in hand, they can use her as a witness against Stanford 
and Davis. Regardless of the outcome of the case, investors should be wary any time they 
come across a yield far higher than average with no clear, plausible, and legal explanation. 
 
Illegal Pyramid or Ponzi Scheme? 
What’s the difference between an illegal pyramid scheme and a Ponzi scheme? They both 
use new investors’ money to make payoffs. But they’re run very differently by their 
promoters, and legally they’re prosecuted under different laws. 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1741 
First we’ll distinguish between legal and illegal pyramid schemes. Then we’ll show how a 
Ponzi scheme and an illegal pyramid are the same thing, only different. 
 
Pyramid Schemes, Legal and Illegal 
 
Illegal pyramids generate revenue by continually recruiting new members. These operations 
may offer merchandise or services for sale, but the only significant revenues come from 
recruitment. 
 
Some legitimate merchandising companies use a pyramid structure to rank their employee-owners 
and to determine those people’s compensation. But a pyramid structure becomes a 
pyramid scheme when the company makes its money by recruiting people. Instead of selling 
a product or service, the group deals primarily in new memberships. Joining the group allows 
the new member to profit by signing up new members. The process continues until the 
available pool of new members is drained, which happens sooner than one might think.  
 
Usually there’s a product or a cause that fronts the illegal pyramid scheme as a legitimate 
enterprise. Promoters shill beeswax supplements, or claim they’re working to prevent youth 
crime. A favorite product front offers “courses” in areas like “investor education” or “self 
esteem.” These materials usually convey very little pertinent information; in fact, they’re 
nothing more than motivational tracts designed to make the victim a more enthusiastic 
participant in the pyramid.  
 
In any case, regardless of the product front, an illegal pyramid emphasizes recruiting first and 
foremost. The product or service takes a back seat to getting new suckers signed up. 
 
As a rule of thumb most courts apply the 70 Percent Rule. This requires that at least 70 
percent of distributor’s profits come from retail sales. Of course this figure can be hard to 
verify. Distributors routinely sign falsified compliance statements because if they don’t, 
promoters warn, the authorities will shut the whole thing down and everyone loses. 
 
In the final assessment, legality rests on what the operators emphasize. If the company 
emphasizes the recruitment of new members over the sales of products, and if the only way 
to recognize promised riches is through recruitment, then the operation will likely be 
classified as an illegal pyramid. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1742                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
What’s the Difference Between an Illegal Pyramid and a Ponzi Scheme? 
 
Illegal pyramids are promoted as pyramids. Ponzi schemes are promoted as investment 
opportunities. 
 
The key element in a Ponzi scheme is that initial investors are paid with subsequent 
investors’ money. There is litle or no legitimate commerce.  
 
The same thing occurs in an illegal pyramid. Nobody’s selling the beeswax supplements; 
they’re all coaxing new people to put up money. The original members of the pyramid get 
rich on subsequent investors’ money. So, a pyramid is a Ponzi scheme.  
 
How about the obverse? Is a Ponzi scheme a pyramid? The distinguishing factor of the 
illegal pyramid is the continual need for new investors. Each new member recruits two 
members, who each recruit two, and so forth.  
 
Ponzi schemes, like pyramids, require a steady march of new investor funds to pay 
dividends. This ever-growing pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graphed. So, in the 
sense that it requires exponential growth to avoid collapse, a Ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme.  
 
The difference between a Ponzi and a pyramid lies in how the operation is promoted.  
 
Illegal pyramids announce themselves as pyramids: they hype levels or stages in their literature. 
The pyramidal structure helps draw new players, each believing that they will rise through 
the ranks of the pyramid to become “golden,” or “fully vested”—whatever hokey titles the 
scammers have concocted. 
 
A Ponzi scheme, on the other hand, masquerades as some type of investment — in financial 
instruments, mineral rights, or some other form of speculation. The participants believe 
they’re buying mortgage-backed securities, or partial interest in an oil well. They have no idea 
they’re funneling money into a bottomless pit.  Certainly no one suggests moving on to the 
next level of the pyramid, because the pyramid isn’t part of the pitch. 
 
When an enterprise—Nu-Skin International, for example — promotes itself as an 
organization with levels or stages, and the only way to rise through the levels is to recruit 
new members, the promoters are running an illegal pyramid scheme. Before Tim and 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1743 
Melinda Rommel sued Nu-Skin, they were true believers, sprinkling Nu-Skin products across 
their bathrooms and kitchens, serving Splash, Nu-Skin’s answer to Tang, for breakfast every 
day, and even redecorating their house at the behest of Nu-Skin consultants, all for the 
purpose of snaring new recruits. The Rommels sued because they were misled about their 
opportunities inside the organization. They knew all along they were joining a pyramid, they 
just thought it was a legal one. 
 
When an enterprise promotes an investment opportunity that invests little or none of the 
participants’ money and that uses new investment dollars to make dividend payments, the 
promoters are running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Distinguishing between Ponzis and pyramids seems a bit academic. But the differences 
become significant when perpetrators are brought to justice. To prosecute an illegal pyramid, 
the enforcement team needs to show that the offenders generated revenue mainly through 
recruitment—the company’s pyramidal structure is an element of the charge. Pyramid 
schemes are sometimes charged as illegal lotteries because, prosecutors have successfully 
argued, the participants are totally dependent on the actions of others for any compensation.  
 
In another prosecution strategy, operators are charged with falsely representing potential 
earnings, since the mathematical limits of the pyramid make the promised $10,000 a month 
impossible or extremely against the odds. Again, the pyramidal structure itself is an issue in 
the case. 
 
In summary: 
 
If operators make the bulk of participants’ earnings dependent on recruiting, and 
emphasize levels and stages in their promotions, we call this an illegal pyramid. 
 
If operators claim they’re offering an investment opportunity, but conduct little or no 
commercial activity, we call this a Ponzi scheme. 
 
Categories of Ponzi Schemes 
Ponzi schemes are classified according to the front used in their promotion. The categories 
are pure cash (which includes endless chain schemes and fill-and-split games) and product fronts  
(which includes financial instruments, MLMs, and speculations).  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1744                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Pure Cash Schemes 
There are two general types of pure cash schemes: endless chains and fill-and-split games. 
 
ENDLESS CHAINS 
The most outrageous pyramid scams don’t bother to hide their stripes. They don’t use 
services or products to establish their legitimacy. Instead they use the “chain letter” 
approach. The recipient of the letter sends a sum of money ($5, $50, $100, the amount varies 
but isn’t usually very large) to the person who mailed them the letter, then passes the letter 
on to three or four others.  
 
Probability studies have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the players in a pyramid (everyone 
but those at the earliest initiation) will lose most of their money. Fully half can expect to lose 
everything they put in.  
 
Some Internet chains have become known as “administered” pyramid schemes — every 
exchange in the chain is monitored by a central administrator, who makes sure everybody’s 
playing (and paying) along. The administrator takes a cut of each transaction.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1745 
FILL-AND-SPLIT GAMES 
The best way to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with gaming elements, some kind 
of hook to keep players’ attention focused on their riches and not how stupid their latest 
“opportunity” really is. These are sometimes called “fill-and-split games.” A popular version 
of this approach has been known as “Airplane.” Each player buys a seat on a fictitious 
airplane, paying from $200 to $2,000 a seat, depending on the scale of the game. Initial 
players help recruit new “passengers” and move up through the ranks of “crew,” “copilot,” 
and “pilot.” When a flight is fully booked — with something like six passengers, four crew 
members, a copilot, and a pilot — the plane takes off, the pilots and crew are paid for the 
flight, and everybody moves up the ranks. Just like a real airline, a plane’s investors are 
constantly looking to fill their seats.  
 
Another variation of the fill-and-split game tries to capitalize on the phenomenal profits 
yielded over the last 15 years by the American stock market. Called “Financial Networking,” 
“Market Climb,” or another financial-sounding name, these pure cash pyramids use a business 
metaphor in their pitch. A typical operation spreads 15 people over four levels. Eight investors 
buy into the network as “vice-presidents”; above them are four “presidents,” just below two 
“cochairman” positions; at the top, sitting pretty, is the “chairman.” Every time the eight slots 
at the bottom are filled (average price $1,500 to $2,000), the pyramid splits. The chairman gets 
out of the game with a “golden parachute” and everyone moves up the corporate ladder, 
anxiously scanning for new recruits.  
 
These games are usually predicated on what’s become known as affinity fraud. New players 
are recruited by their affinity with existing participants. People comb religious groups or 
community associations for fresh leads. Affinities may be racial or cultural. Financial 
networking, for example, has targeted a number of African-American communities. 
Churches, synagogues, and other religious organizations offer fertile hunting grounds and 
great cover from promoters—an endorsement from a clergyperson is as good as gold, and 
law enforcement authorities are often reluctant to meddle in religious affairs. Affinity frauds 
may also prey on social groups or professional organizations.  
 
Product Fronts 
The category of product fronts is subdivided into financial instruments, MLMs, and 
speculations. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1746                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 
Financial instruments — such as stocks, borrower’s certificates, currency exchanges, loan 
scams, and investment pools—are perfect tools for the Ponzi artist. Charles Ponzi’s victims 
in 1920 thought they were investing in postal reply coupons that, Ponzi assured everyone, 
yielded whopping profits by playing off the exchange rates of international currency. In our 
own time, as legal tender in Mexico, Brazil, and Asia roller-coasters from one extreme to the 
next, the currency exchange still makes an ideal Ponzi front.  
 
A stock market that gains 25 to 30 percent a year (and individual stocks quadrupling, 
sometimes in a matter of months) encourages the impression that all anyone has to do is put 
down their money and wait by the mailbox. Unscrupulous promoters like to tout new items 
like Internet stocks and biotechnology startups, but any product will do. Even in this wired 
age, commodities futures—from soybeans to pork bellies—are still numbered among the 
most common bait for Ponzi schemes. 
 
Financial instruments are especially effective fronts because most people don’t understand 
how legitimate financial operations take place. When Wall Street is set a-fluttering by 
derivatives of futures contracts, and hedge funds are betting that the market will rise at the 
same time they’re betting it will fall, how is  an average investor with $20,000 supposed to 
understand his options?  
 
MULTILEVEL MARKETING 
When most people hear about a pyramid scheme, they think multilevel marketing, or MLM 
as it’s often abbreviated. These organizations hawk nutrition supplements, household goods, 
cosmetics, television antennas, insurance, long distance phone service, everything from 
antiques to zinc. Also among the offerings might be copies of How to Make a Million Dollars in 
an MLM. One of the industry’s monster money makers is a string of “training materials” 
designed to pump the sales force into ever higher feats of huckstership.  
 
Math remains the great enemy, as well as the prime tool, of MLMs. Promoters scratch 
matrices (never pyramids) on a chalkboard, and compute what 20 people mailing money to a 
distributor’s house every month would amount to in a year’s time. These shillers ignore 
other aspects of the equation. First, the market for any product outside those owned by large 
national brands is extremely small. Cashing in on a submarket requires an excess of savvy, 
finance, and luck, which most MLM-ers lack in spades. Then there’s pyramidal 
mathematics — after a couple of levels, you ru n out of people willing to hear your spiel 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1747 
(which was already less than 5 percent of any area’s population). In fact, between 90 and 95 
percent of MLM operations fail in their first two years (compared to a 70-80 percent failure 
rate for small businesses in general).  
 
As a rule of thumb, any organization that recruits distributors into a pyramid-style 
compensation plan, offers big payoffs for recruiting (say, more than $100 per recruit), and 
spends more time trumpeting its distributor levels than its product lines, is probably illegal.  
 
SPECULATIONS 
For the purpose of this course, the term speculation describes any investment proposition not 
covered as financial instruments or MLMs. This includes franchise offerings and business 
opportunities in general, work-at-home promotions, and investments in areas like real estate 
or mineral rights. These are good old-fashioned investments, except when they’re Ponzi 
schemes. 
 
Franchise scams hawk such opportunities as pay phone businesses or vending machines. By 
their nature, such businesses are spread out geographically and don’t involve much direct 
contact with the promoter and the franchise holder.  
 
Work-at-home promotions are also favorite tools of the franchise scammer. Computer 
technology is a popular front, since thousands of people really are setting up businesses from 
their homes. A few early dividend checks, per the Ponzi playbook, are often enough to 
overcome a client’s hesitation and provoke a more sizeable investment. Then the promoters 
can fold up and move to another state, or another coast.  
 
Big-money speculations often base their high-flown claims in the ground beneath our feet. 
Land, and the minerals drawn from it like gold, coal, and oil, has anciently been regarded as 
the ultimate commodity. The ground is the fundament of every human endeavor so, perhaps 
the land swindle is also the fundament of fraud. Someone, somewhere, it seems, has always 
been selling flooded lots to homesteaders, salting gold mines with chunks of pyrite, or 
assuring a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acres of desert he 
just bought for a song. 
 
Obviously, a commercial environment that thrives on speculation is ripe for Ponzi fraud. 
Remember, the Ponzi element in a Ponzi scheme is only a technique — giving back a few 
dollars to sweeten the pot. Anything that can coax people to part with their money, from 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1748                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
emu farms to underwater land developments, can be run as a Ponzi. All the name Ponzi 
really means is that a few marks get paid. This lends a competitive element to an otherwise 
run-of-the-mill fraud. Instead of everyone losing, some lucky players do make money. 
 
Speculations frauds don’t always start out as cons, but when their rollercoaster dips, many 
speculators find it too tempting to hang on and ride — they figure they can phony their way 
through the crisis, and pick up again later. Again, it’s math that usually dooms these players. 
They simply can’t make money fast enough to feed the deficits. They need a payoff so big 
nothing short of a miracle — or more fraud — will suffice. 
 
Speculators can quickly get caught in a chain reaction, where each fraud demands more 
fraud. By the time these organizations are shut down, they’re spending half of their resources 
or more just covering up their criminal acts.  
 
Spotting Pyramid Schemes 
Almost everyone knows what a pyramid scheme is. People see them exposed on television 
and read about them constantly in magazines and newspapers. So, if everyone is so well 
informed about the pyramid, how does it survive? 
 
It could be that familiarity has lulled the public into a false sense of security. Pyramiders have 
several strong weapons at their disposal: 
• They do pay off. Unlike a simple con game in which the fraudster throws the ruse, grabs 
the cash, and exits, pyramiding builds up the take by paying initial investors. This makes 
for excellent testimonials. Early players circulate the word and bring in new marks. Initial 
payoffs also keep early players coming back. Payoffs make the enterprise look legitimate 
and fuel the expansion process. Charles Phillip Elliot ran his investment business 
pyramid-style for 16 years, taking in more than $60 million from 1,100 investors. When 
Elliot was busted, a business associate quipped, “Elliot paid like a slot machine. He lulled 
everyone to sleep.” 2   
• They operate mainly through preexisting affiliations. Community groups, religious 
organizations, and social clubs all make enticing targets for pyramiders. Any pyramid 
requires a healthy pool of participants, so a large group already gathered together is ideal. 
Besides that, pyramiders know how to manipulate the trust that people place in these 
groups.  
                                                          
2 Holzman, Todd. Business Dateline. October 1987. Pages 16ff.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1749 
• They use ingenuity and false logic in their pitches. The product fronts available for 
pyramiding are myriad, from bath soap to electronics. Fronts in financial instruments 
and real estate are especially effective because most people don’t understand how those 
businesses work anyway. Pure cash games find clever metaphors—like a conceptual 
airplane, or a business executives’ hierarchy — to make themselves attractive.  
 
Pyramiders of every stripe use a seductive, though false, logic in their pitch: “Everybody has 
friends and associates; you only have to sign up three or four people below you.” Of course 
the laws of mathematics spell doom to this logic. There simply aren’t enough players to keep 
even a small pyramid running. Three people, each finding three people, will quickly play out 
their available friends and associates — if not mathematically, then socially. There’s also a 
reasonable limit on how quickly money can grow. 
 
The pyramid, then, is built to overcome people’s most common misgivings about investing. 
Promoters offer far more than an “undertaking of great advantage, nobody to know what it 
is.” They are very specific in their prospectus.  The offer sounds good and (within its own 
logic) makes sense. The “opportunity” is usually pitched by someone familiar to the victim, 
or at least by someone with an affinity the victim trusts. Most importantly, the pyramid does 
return people’s money, with the incredible profits attached as promised.  
 
Speed is another potent weapon in the pyramid arsenal. Cons say, “Get in now, or regret it 
forever.” They don’t have time — because of market demand, or commitments elsewhere —
 for the person to check out the deal. That’s because a moderate amount of due diligence 
research will expose the deal as a scheme.  
 
The final factor is greed. A recent poll quoted in Charles Whitlock’s Easy Money, revealed 
that when people received telephone calls from a bogus investment company, one in twenty 
took the bait. The victims had no prior contact with the salesperson or the company, but 
still, five percent of them bought. But there was a catch. The poll also reported that, 
considering all those stung by a telephone fraud, only two percent of those calling 
themselves trusting, and just two percent of those who called themselves open-minded, had 
been the victims of fraud. Simply put, persons with healthy lives, strong family ties, and an 
honest work ethic are not as likely to get burned as people who are lonely, desperate, and out 
to make a quick buck. Of course, as our examples have shown, the range of people caught in 
pyramid schemes has no bounds. Plenty of victims are experienced, careful professionals 
who have either let down their guard or become ensnared by the cleverest of shams.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1750                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Franchise Fraud   
Franchising is part of the American Dream. A gateway to business ownership for millions of 
Americans, franchising is estimated to account for more than 40 percent of all retail sales in 
the United States — a percentage that is expected to reach 50 percent in a few short years 
according to a report issued by the House Committee on Small Business. But the dream of 
business ownership can be easily shattered by fraud.  
  
Franchise Regulation 
In 1978, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) entered the realm of franchise regulation 
by enacting “Disclosure Requirements and Prohibitions Concerning Franchising And 
Business Opportunity Ventures”—the “FTC Rule” (16 C.F.R. Part 436). As stated by the 
FTC, “the Rule is designed to enable potential franchisees to protect themselves before 
investing by providing them with information essential to an assessment of the potential 
risks and benefits, to meaningful comparisons with other investments, and to further 
investigation of the franchise opportunity.” As this mission statement suggests, the FTC rule 
addresses the disclosures made by franchisers to potential franchisees, as opposed to ongoing 
issues in the relationship  between franchisers and franchisees and other issues that arise in the 
termination  of franchise relationships.  
 
But the 1978 enactment of the FTC rule did not lead to the eradication of fraud claims in 
franchising relationships—among the rule’s deficiencies, it does not create a private civil 
action. Many state legislatures have enacted laws that supplement the FTC Rule. Illinois is a 
good example of a progressive state in franchisee law. The rule, however, preempts any 
inconsistent state disclosure laws.  
 
The FTC Franchise Rule 
The FTC Franchise Rule prohibits fraud in the initial sale of a franchise in which the 
franchise affects interstate commerce. Under the rule, franchisors must furnish potential 
franchisees with written disclosures providing important information about the franchisor, 
the franchised business and the franchise relationship, and give them at least 10 business 
days to review it before investing. 
 
                                                          
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1751 
Franchisors may make the required disclosures by following either the Rule’s disclosure 
format or the Uniform Franchise Offering Circular (UFOC) Guidelines prepared by state 
franchise law officials. 
 
The Rule imposes six different requirements in connection with the “advertising, offering, 
licensing, contracting, sale, or other promotion” of a franchise in or affecting commerce:  
• The Rule requires franchisors to give potential investors a basic disclosure document at 
the earlier of the first face-to-face meeting or 10 business days before any money is paid 
or an agreement is signed in connection with the investment. 
• If a franchisor makes earnings claims, whether historical or forecasted, they must have a 
reasonable basis, and prescribed substantiating disclosures must be given to a potential 
investor in writing at the same time as the basic disclosures.  
• The Rule affects only ads that include an earnings claim. Such ads must disclose the 
number and percentage of existing franchisees who have achieved the claimed results, 
along with cautionary language. Their use triggers required compliance with the Rule’s 
earnings claim disclosure requirements.  
• The franchisor must give investors a copy of its standard-form franchise and related 
agreements at the same time as the basic disclosures, and final copies intended to be 
executed at least five business days before signing.  
• The Rule requires franchisors to make refunds of deposits and initial payments to 
potential investors, subject to any conditions on refundability stated in the disclosure 
document.  
 
While franchisors are free to provide investors with any promotional or other materials they 
wish, no written or oral claims may contradict information provided in the required 
disclosure document.  
 
The FTC alone has jurisdiction to enforce the rule. However, any misrepresentations in a 
UFOC certainly could be used to support claims for fraud under state statutory and/or 
common law. The FTC rule preempts inconsistent state laws. As a practical matter, it creates 
a minimum disclosure standard, which many states have equaled or enhanced by statute. 
 
State Laws 
More than half of the states have enacted either general franchise disclosure laws or business 
opportunity laws, or both. Approximately 15 states have enacted franchise disclosure laws 
that create a cause of action for failure to register a franchise with the designated state 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1752                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency and/or failure to provide the appropriate disclosure to the prospective franchisee in a 
timely manner. Those states include California, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, 
Minnesota, New York, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Virginia, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. These state laws give franchise purchasers important legal 
rights, including the right to bring private lawsuits for violations of the state disclosure 
requirements. The state statutes provide damages or rescission as the remedies available to 
the successful franchisee. 
 
About 25 states have adopted laws that regulate the offer and sale of a business opportunity 
and such legislation might be applicable franchise agreements. Those states include Alaska, 
California, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, 
Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virgina, and Washington.  
  
Other Remedies  
COMMON LAW FRAUD 
The failure of the FTC to outlaw fraud in franchising specifically beyond the disclosure 
phase does not leave a defrauded franchisee without remedies. Common law fraud is 
applicable. In general, a common law fraud action requires proof of a knowing or recklessly 
false representation or omission of material fact, reliance, and injury.  
 
Additionally, a contract may be voidable for fraud in the inducement, which occurs when one 
party enters into a contract based on the other party’s fraud. For example, if one party 
deliberately misrepresented material facts to the other, the contract will be unenforceable at 
the option of the aggrieved party. But claims of fraud in the inducement (disclosure fraud) 
are often defeated by carefully drafted language in the franchise agreement.  
 
RICO 
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), 18, U.S.C., § 1961 et seq., 
is the most powerful anti-fraud statute available to civil litigants because it provides for 
automatic trebling (tripling) of damages plus attorneys’ fees and costs—and RICO is highly 
relevant to franchising. There have been several cases where class action plaintiffs have 
established RICO claims based on the ongoing, system-wide fraud that had occurred 
concerning the advertising funds. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1753 
Overview of Franchising   
Under the FTC rule, as well as the statutory and/or common law of all or almost all of the 
states, there are three prerequisites to apply the rule to a business format or product 
franchise: trademark, significant control or assistance, and required payment.  
 
Trademark
The franchiser offers the right to distribute goods or services that bear the franchiser’s 
trademark, service mark, trade name, advertising, or other commercial symbol. 
 
Significant Control or Assistance 
The franchiser exercises significant control over, and/or offers substantial assistance to the 
franchisee in the operation of the franchised business. 
 
Required Payment 
The franchisee is required to pay the franchiser. These payments usually include initial 
franchise fees and ongoing royalties that are calculated as a percentage of sales, net of sales 
tax. Another typical fee is a transfer fee that is applicable on the sale of a franchise. 
 
Fraud in franchising may occur at each stage of the franchise relationship, creating 
disclosure, relationship, and termination issues. 
 
Disclosure Issues 
“Disclosure issues” arise when the franchiser fails to communicate material information or 
discloses false information to induce the franchisee to purchase a franchise that he would 
not have otherwise purchased. Two prime examples of potentially misleading information 
are earnings claims and success rates. 
 
Earnings Claims 
Assume that a prospective franchisee relies upon earnings claims published by the franchiser as 
a key factor in his decision to buy the franchise, but those earnings claims are materially 
misleading, or even blatantly false. This is a prime example of disclosure fraud in connection 
with the franchiser’s inducement of potential franchisees to buy the franchise.  
 
Disclosure fraud historically has been the primary target of franchiser regulations. The FTC 
reported that from 1989 to 1992, 100 percent of its franchise enforcement cases were based 
on allegations that the franchiser had provided fraudulent or misleading earnings claims. But 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1754                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
surprisingly, the FTC does not require franchisers to disclose earnings. The FTC rule 
provides for the disclosure of earnings claims regarding actual or potential sales. Income, 
costs, or profits of either existing or prospective franchisees is optional. But if a franchiser 
elects to make earnings claims, it must have a “reasonable” basis for those claims. 
 
Absent published earnings claims, the prospective franchisee is vulnerable to non-written, 
boastful earnings claims made by franchise salespeople who make their living selling 
franchises instead of selling the underlying goods or services. Those non-written claims may 
turn out to be false but the franchiser may try to protect itself by including in the written 
franchise agreement a “no reliance” or “integration” clause that states in effect: 
 
Franchisee acknowledges that this Agreement is the entire agreement of the parties, and 
that in entering into this Agreement, he or she is not relying upon any statements or 
representations that may have been made on or before the date of this Agreement, which are 
not expressly made a part of this Agreement.  
 
Clauses similar to this one often have been used to defeat claims of fraud submitted by 
franchisees who were induced to sign a contract based upon the franchiser’s verbal 
representations. 
 
Success Rates 
Another important disclosure issue is a franchiser’s claim that “X” percent (usually a high 
percentage) of its stores have been successful; in other words, they have remained in 
continuous operation from opening day to the present. But the franchise salesperson may 
not have told the franchisee that a number of stores were sold many times and in each sale 
the old franchisee sold the store back to the franchiser who re-sold it to a new franchisee. 
Would that additional information be material to the prospective franchisee? Would failure 
to disclose that information amount to fraud?  
 
The FTC rule does not require franchisers to disclose re-sales or turnovers from one 
franchisee to the next.  
 
Relationship Issues 
Fraud in franchising is not limited to disclosure fraud. Once the franchising relationship is 
established, the franchiser and franchisee stand in a business relationship that typically 
involves the transaction of funds at several levels under a series of contracts:  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1755 
• The payment of royalties under the franchise or license agreement for the right to use 
the franchiser’s trademark, trade name, and business system. 
• The payment of rent under a lease or sub-lease of real property and/or equipment. 
• Contributions to an advertising fund. 
 
All of these financial transactions may be subject to claims for breach of contract, fraud, or 
breach of a fiduciary duty. Of course, to determine the exact claims, you must consult the 
exact language in the franchise agreement.  
Numerous issues also may arise in the course of the franchise relationship, each of which 
reflects an inherent tension between the interests of franchiser and franchisee: 
• Training and support.  Has the franchiser provided the level of training and technical 
support that was promised? 
• Control. What degree of control is the franchiser en titled to exercise over the franchisee’s 
products, suppliers, and pricing? To what extent may the franchiser derive profit from 
the franchisee’s supplier relationships? 
• New products.  To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to introduce new products 
to keep ahead of the competition? Once the decision to introduce new products is made, 
is the franchiser held to any “standard of care” to ensure that the product is successful? 
• Expansion or contraction of the system.  Does the franchiser’s natural desire to expand the 
franchise system conflict with a franchisee’s de sire to maximize profits at his location? 
Conversely, what duties, if any, does a franchiser owe to franchisees in a particular 
market if the franchiser plans to withdraw from that market? 
• Encroachment. To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to refrain from opening 
new outlets “too close” to existing units? How close is “too close” if the license 
agreement is silent?  
• Expansion by the franchisee. To what extent is an individual franchisee’s desire to expand in 
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole?  
• Reinvestment. May a franchiser require a franchisee to reinvest a portion of his revenue 
back into the business? Does it depend on whether the franchisee owns or leases the  
real estate? 
 
Termination Issues 
The end of a franchise relationship also may provide grounds for litigation: 
• Renewal.  Does a franchiser have a duty to renew a franchisee beyond the initial term of 
his license agreement? 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1756                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Early termination. Under what circumstances may a franchiser terminate a franchise before 
the expiration of his contractual term? 
• Sale of a franchise. Under what circumstances may a franchiser veto a franchisee’s 
proposed sale of his franchise to a third-party? 
• Post-termination restrictions on competition.  To what extent may the franchiser restrict the 
franchisee’s right to compete after termination? Even if a franchisee is allowed to 
compete after the franchise relationship is ended, the franchiser may sometimes validly 
demand that the franchisee leave his business telephone number to the franchiser as it 
departs the system. 
 
 
Identity Theft 
Identity theft is an increasingly frequent type of fraud that is non-discriminatory in nature. 
Anyone can be targeted; the victim might be a college student, a retiree, a schoolteacher, or a 
successful attorney. Even corporations are susceptible to identity theft.  
 
2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report 
According to the 2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report conducted by Javelin Strategy & Research, 
the number of identity fraud victims in the U.S. has increased to 11 million from 10 million 
reported in the 2009 report. Although the total annual fraud amount increased by 12.5 
percent over the previous year to $54 billion, the report found that detection and resolution 
efforts are working well.  
 
Some of the key findings of the survey were: 
• The mean consumer cost of identity fraud decreased 25 percent, from $496 per incident 
in 2008 to $373 per incident in 2009, as a result of faster detection, lower fraud amounts, 
and quicker resolution times.  
• Social networking fraud and potential threats will likely escalate in the upcoming years.  
One of the dangers of social networking sites is the public display of personal 
information. Personal pages and account profiles can expose sensitive, personally 
identifiable information, and hints on how to easily find it. Criminals can harvest this 
information to take over accounts or open fraudulent accounts. 
• Contrary to prior years’ data, online identity theft methods constituted 42 percent of 
fraud cases in 2009. The other significant group of known cases occur through 
traditional methods when a criminal can make direct contact with the consumer’s 
personal information. The common methods of access included: 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1757 
- Obtained from a lost or stolen wallet, checkbook, credit card, or other physical 
document 
- Accessed while conducting a purchase or transactionAccessed by friends, 
acquaintances, relatives, or in-home employees 
- Stolen from a company that handles your financial data 
- Stolen paper mail 
 
Although there is no universal definition of identity theft, the Department of Justice offers 
the following definition: 
 
Identity theft and fraud are crimes in which someone wrongfully obtains and uses another 
person’s personal data in some way that involves fraud or deception, typically for economic 
gain.  
 
Personal identification data includes name, address, Social Security number, date of birth, 
mother’s maiden name, or other identifying information. The perpetrator exploits this 
information by opening bank or credit card accounts, taking over existing accounts, 
obtaining loans, leasing cars or apartments, or applying for wireless telephone and utilities 
services in the victim’s name without his knowledge.  
 
Technological advancements that facilitate the electronic transfer of personal information 
and the transmission of financial transactions have greatly contributed to the recent increase 
in occurrences of identity theft. As such technologies continue to develop, this type of fraud 
will likely remain a serious problem that affects many people. 
 
The Profile 
Unlike some fraudsters who steal as the result of a perceived need, most identity thieves 
make a living stealing identities for profit or at the very least, to supplement their incomes 
generously. Although it can be an employee, friend, or relative, generally the fraudster usually 
falls into one or more profiles: 
• Been convicted, served time in prison, wishes to conceal his identity  
• Been convicted, served time in prison and looking for a “safer” way to commit a crime 
and stay out of prison 
• College student looking for an “easy” way to work his way through school 
• Landlord 
• Rental car agents 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1758                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Illegal aliens needing an identity 
• Illegal telemarketers 
 
Common Ways of Obtaining Information 
While you might think that you are careful with your personal information, in reality, a lot of 
information can be easily found and acquired by identity thieves without you even realizing 
it. An innocent inquiry for the most basic of information, such as verifying an address or 
mother’s maiden name for a banker’s files, can be the start of a financial nightmare. The 
most common ways information is obtained are: 
• Sorting through discarded trash 
• Shoulder surfing 
• Rifling through coworker’s desk drawers 
• Theft of mail — incoming or outgoing 
• Using an accomplice within the organization  
• Soliciting identifiers through false job application schemes 
• Telephone companies, health clubs, and schools 
• Certifications and licenses placed on workplace walls  
• Using pretext, ruse, or gag calls  
• Rental and loan applications  
• Public records  
• The Internet 
 
Sorting Through Discarded Trash 
Most people do not destroy their personal financial data; they simply throw it away with the 
rest of their trash for pick-up by the garbage collectors on their regularly scheduled day. 
Solicitations for pre-approved credit cards are some of the most valuable pieces of trash that 
an identity thief can steal. Additionally, “dumpster diving” as it is more popularly known as, 
can yield checks, credit card and bank statements, or other records that bear your name, 
address, and telephone number. In addition to targeting an individual’s trash, dumpster 
divers target the trash at banks, insurance companies, hospitals, and other businesses—
 locations that an individual has no control over. 
 
Shoulder Surfing 
Shoulder surfing is another popular way that the identity thief obtains information. The 
person watches from a nearby location and listens to someone’s telephone conversation or 
watches the numbers being punched for a calling card or credit card, thus obtaining enough 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1759 
information to use or procure a credit card. Identity thieves also watch potential victims as 
they fill out bank deposit slips thus getting account information. 
 
Rifling Through Coworker’s Desk Drawers 
When people leave for break, go to lunch, or take vacation or sick leave, many if not most, 
do not lock up their desks or offices. Many people also leave personal items in their desk 
drawers, such as bank statements, monthly credit card statements, or mortgage coupon 
books — all of which have useful information for an identity thief. 
 
Theft of Mail — Incoming or Outgoing 
Theft of mail in either direction provides useful information to the fraudster. Outgoing 
checks left for the mail carrier to pick up provide bank account numbers and other 
information that can be used for illegal purposes. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Using just a driver’s license number and bank account number, a thief was able to 
withdraw more than $30,000 from a security guard’s checking account. In this case, the 
thief used the drive-through at the security guard’s bank to deposit a series of stolen money 
orders and simultaneously make large withdrawals.  
 
Using an Accomplice Within the Organization  
Sometimes the identity thief is able to compromise someone within an organization and 
obtain enough information where credit can be obtained. It may be a bank employee who 
has access to Social Security numbers and bank balances or an insurance clerk who has 
access to personal information such as name, address, Social Security numbers, and medical 
information — all useful when assuming someone’s identity. 
 
Soliciting Identifiers Through False Job Application Schemes 
Filling out a job application might also be the source of information to identity thieves. 
People believe that they are filling out a job application, when in reality they are only 
supplying personal information to a thief. 
 
Utility Companies, Health Clubs, and Schools 
Utility companies, health clubs, and schools all carry identifiers that a fraudster can make use 
of. Once again, the Social Security number is used on many applications and is a key to 
obtaining other information. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1760                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A California woman used a stolen Social Security number to obtain thousands of dollars 
in credit and then filed for bankruptcy in the name of her victim. She was sentenced to 16 
months in federal prison. In addition to the prison term, she was ordered to pay restitution 
in the amount of $13,928 and pay a $5,000 criminal fine.  
 
She admitted that she assumed the identity of another woman with a similar name in order 
to obtain loans that she was not qualified to receive. The FBI began investigating the case 
after it was contacted by the victim, an English professor at a university in Georgia. The 
professor had graduated from a college in Arizona that the defendant also briefly attended, 
and both women had received student loans that were administered through the same 
company.  
 
Due to a computer mix-up, documents belonging to the professor — which included her 
Social Security number — were sent to the defendant. Shortly thereafter, the professor began 
receiving telephone calls from companies that she had never heard of claiming she owed them 
large sums of money. 
 
Certifications, Diplomas, Licenses Placed On Workplace Walls 
Something as innocent as a diploma, professional certification, or license can be the 
identifying information that a fraudster uses to obtain a false identity. In the case of a 
professional license, some states require that it be displayed in a prominent place. 
Consequently, information such as the name, address, and license number is readily available 
to the thief. 
 
Using Pretext, Ruse, or Gag Calls  
Using pretext, ruse, or gag calls claiming to be a person to whom personal information 
would normally be released is common in an identity theft. Since there is no way to verify 
the person on the end of a phone line with photo identification, having only a small amount 
of information can yield the additional data the fraudster seeks. 
 
For example, a number of individuals have reported being called by people claiming to be 
court personnel. The caller states that there is an outstanding warrant for the individual due 
to unpaid tickets or failure to appear for jury duty. When the individual protests his 
innocence, the caller says that it must be a mistake, and asks the individual to provide his 
driver’s license number, Social Security number, and birth date so that the caller can confirm 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1761 
that a mistake has been made. The caller now has all the information needed to steal the 
individual’s identity. 
 
Rental and Loan Applications 
Almost without exception, rental and loan applications yield enough information that can be 
used to establish a false identity. An applicant’s name, Social Security number, previous 
address(es), employment history, telephone numbers, and credit history are required to 
complete the application. Once the thief gets a hold of that information, it is usually quite 
easy to establish an identity. 
 
Public Records  
Public records yield a wealth of personal data for the identity thief. Real estate records, tax 
liens, licenses, litigation records, and, in some states, drivers license numbers, all reveal 
enough information that can be used to steal a person’s identity or least provide a start for 
the fraudster. 
 
The Internet 
The Internet offers many opportunities to the identity thief. It has made much information 
available to more people at a small cost. It has also been an attractive place for identity 
thieves to find their victim. Once you have logged on, information you thought was private 
might now be traced by anyone who is interested in finding personal information about you. 
Identifying information such as passwords, credit card numbers, and in some cases, banking 
information has been made available via the Internet. Spam, or unsolicited e-mail, is 
frequently responded to by many people who are unaware that the sole purpose of the e-
 mail is to obtain personal information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A Midwestern woman was accused of trying to get a $25,000 loan through an Illinois 
bank using personal information she found on the Internet. The victim, a college professor, 
called police when the bank sent the completed application to her home rather than to the 
home of the accused. The same woman reportedly obtained a MasterCard under another 
professor’s name and ran up almost $3,000 in charges.  
 
In addition, some database companies sell information — your personal information — online 
to persons or organizations that you might not want to have that information, thus 
increasing the chance for fraud and abuse. For example, information you provide by 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1762                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
responding to a questionnaire online might be collected and sold to insurance and drug 
companies without your knowledge. The same can be true when applying for a low-interest 
credit card or consumer loans. Do you know who is actually receiving the information that 
you provide online? There is no physical address to check out in most cases. 
 
The Internet also is a source for “information brokering.” For a fee, information brokers will 
reveal the most personal aspects of your life — from financial information to medical 
information. For fees as low as $40 per search, they will disclose everything from non-published 
telephone numbers to the location of your safety deposit box. Some of it is legal 
and can be found in public records, but some of it is illegal.  
 
Tracking Down the Thief 
There are many ways that the fraud examiner can track down an identity thief. Some require 
the assistance of law enforcement, while others do not. Examples of techniques that have 
been successfully used to catch an identity thief are: 
• Establish surveillance of the address in question. 
• Have overnight delivery services “flag” the address in question. 
• Subpoena telephone records for the telephone(s) being used by the perpetrator. 
• Contact credit bureaus and have them “fl ag” the true account holder’s file. 
• Contact the Social Security Administration to determine if the number is listed twice in 
the system. 
• Obtain videos from retailers showing the perpetrator making purchases using the 
victim’s identity. 
• Obtain a copy of the perpetrator’s picture on the fictitious driver’s license. 
• Track down addresses and telephone numbers that do not belong to the victim but show 
up in their file. 
• Have the victim notify the fraud examiner when further breaches occur. 
• Report the fraud to law enforcement. 
 
Confronting the Fraudster 
If the fraudster has been identified and is to be confronted, the fraud examiner should keep 
the following in mind: 
• On initial contact, call the fraudster by the wrong name; generally he will then produce 
identification in the name of the victim. 
• Try to establish the fraudster’s true identity. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1763 
• For safety reasons, use caution when confronting the thief; never forget that the 
fraudster could be a convicted felon who does not want to go back to prison. 
 
Federal Identity Theft Statutes 
There are two primary federal laws that address identity theft: the Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act and the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act. 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
In October 1998, Congress passed the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
(Identity Theft Act) to address the problem of identity theft. Specifically, the Act outlaws the 
intentional and unauthorized use of another individual’s identification, with the intent to 
commit a crime.  
 
It carries a maximum term of 15 years’ imprisonment, a fine, and criminal forfeiture of any 
personal property used or intended to be used to commit the offense. (The penalty is 
increased to a maximum of 30 years imprisonment if the offense is committed to facilitate 
an act of terrorism.) Identity theft schemes may also involve other violations such as mail 
fraud, wire fraud, credit card fraud, or financial institution fraud. 
 
Violations of the Act are investigated by federal investigative agencies such as the U.S. Secret 
Service, the FBI, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service and are prosecuted by the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act 
In August 2004, Congress passed the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act (18, U.S.C., § 
1028A). This Act strengthens federal law on identity theft by creating a crime of “aggravated 
identity theft.” Aggravated identity theft occurs when an individual uses a stolen identity to 
commit other crimes. Specifically, this law provides that where one “knowingly transfers, 
possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of another” during and 
in relation to any felony violation of/or relating to fraud, embezzlement, false statements, 
and the like, an additional term of imprisonment of two years will be imposed on the 
individual. In April 2005, the United States Sentencing Commission went an extra step to 
impose consecutive mandatory minimum sentences of two and five years depending on the 
underlying offense of misusing a stolen identification. The guideline became effective 
November 1, 2005. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1764                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
See the chapter on “The Law Related to Fraud” in the Legal Section for more information 
about this Act. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Wisconsin man was sentenced to 21 months imprisonment and three years supervised 
release after pleading guilty to identity theft. The defendant was also ordered to pay 
restitution totaling $62,850. 
 
The perpetrator pled guilty to using another man’s identity to obtain employment with a 
cleaning company, then using that employment to commit a burglary. 
  
Through his job at the cleaning company, the fraudster gained access to the offices of the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court where he took six computer monitors owned by the State of 
Wisconsin. The monitors were recovered almost immediately following the burglary after the 
thief abandoned the vehicle that he was driving.  
 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which protects customers’ financial information held by 
banks working in personal finance, creates privacy obligations for financial institutions. 
Specifically, financial institutions have privacy obligations under the Act’s Financial Privacy 
Rule and Safeguards Rule. The Financial Privacy Rule requires financial institutions to 
provide their customers with privacy notices explaining the institution’s policies for 
collecting and sharing personal financial information. Conversely, the Safeguards Rule 
requires all financial institutions to design, implement, and maintain safeguards to protect the 
confidentiality and integrity of customers’ personal information. 
 
Additionally, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act includes a provision that prohibits “pretexting.” 
This statute makes it illegal for anyone to obtain customer information from financial 
institutions by impersonating someone else or making false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statements. It also prohibits soliciting someone else to engage in pretexting. Violations of 
this provision can result in a fine, imprisonment of up to 5 years, or both.  
 
More information about other provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act can be found in 
the “Sources of Information” chapter in the Investigation Section of the Fraud Examiners  
Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1765 
Red Flag Rules 
On January 1, 2008, the Identity Theft Red Flag regulations (Red Flag Rules), which update 
sections of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, became effective. Issued 
by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and five Federal bank regulatory agencies, the Red 
Flag Rules require financial institutions and creditors (i.e., banking institutions, retailers, 
utilities, car dealers, etc.) to develop and implement a written identity theft prevention 
program to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft for both new and existing 
accounts in numerous industries, including financial services, utilities, health care, and 
telecommunications.  
 
The agencies also issued guidelines to assist financial institutions and creditors in developing 
and implementing a program, including a supplement that provides 26 examples of identity 
theft red flags. 
 
More information about the Red Flag Rules can be found in the “Financial Institution 
Fraud” chapter above. 
 
State Laws 
States have also passed laws related to identity theft. Below is a list of U.S. states and 
territories that have passed such laws. Other states may be considering legislation in their 
next legislative session. In addition, where specific laws on identity theft have not been 
passed, there may be remedies under other state laws.  
 
Alabama Alabama Code § 13A-8-192 
Alaska Alaska Stat § 11.46.565, 570 
Arizona Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-2008 
Arkansas Ark. Code Ann. § 5-37-227 
California Cal. Penal Code § 530.5-8 
Colorado Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18-5-902 
Connecticut Conn. Stat. § 53a-129 (criminal) 
Conn. Stat. § 52-571h (civil) 
Delaware Del. Code Ann., tit. 5 § 854 
District of Columbia D.C. Official Code § 22-3227.02-04 
Florida Fla. Stat. Ann. § 817.568 
Georgia Ga. Code Ann. § 16-9-120 through 128 
Guam 9 Guam Code Ann. § 46.80 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1766                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hawaii HI Rev. Stat. § 708-839.6-8 
Idaho Idaho Code § 18-3126 (criminal) 
Illinois 720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/16G-13 
Indiana Ind. Code § 35-43-5-3.5 
Iowa Iowa Code § 715A.8 (criminal)  
Kansas Kan. Stat. Ann. § 21-4018 
Kentucky Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. §  514.160 
Louisiana La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 14:67.16 
Maine ME Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A §905-A 
Maryland Md. Code Ann. art. 27 § 231 
Massachusetts Mass. Gen. Laws § 397-37E 
Michigan Mich. Comp. Laws § 445.65 
Minnesota Minn. Stat. Ann. §  609.527 
Mississippi  Miss. Code Ann. § 97-19-85 
Missouri Mo. Rev. Stat. § 570.223 
Montana Mon. Code Ann § 45-6-332 
Nebraska NE Rev. Stat. § 28-608, 620 
Nevada Nev. Rev. State. § 205.463-465 
New Hampshire  N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 638:26 
New Jersey  N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2C:21-17 
New Mexico N.M. Stat. Ann. § 30-16-24.1 
New York N.Y. CLS Penal § 190.77-190.84 
North Carolina N.C. Gen. Stat. § 14-113.20-23 
North Dakota N.D.C.C. § 12.1-23-11 
Ohio Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 2913.49 
Oklahoma Okla. Stat. tit. 21, § 1533.1 
Oregon Or. Rev. Stat. § 165.800 
Pennsylvania 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 4120 
Rhode Island R.I. Gen. Laws § 11-49.1-1-4 
South Carolina S.C. Code Ann. § 16-13-510-530 
South Dakota S.D. Codified Laws § 22-30A-3.1. 
Tennessee TCA § 39-14-150 (criminal) 
TCA § 47-18-2101-2103, 2105 (civil)  
Texas  Tex. Penal Code § 32.51 
Utah Utah Code Ann. § 76-6-1101 -1104 
Vermont Vermont Code § 13.2030 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1767 
Virginia Va. Code Ann. § 18.2-186.3 
Washington Wash. Rev. Code § 9.35.020 
West Virginia W. Va. Code § 61-3-54 
Wisconsin Wis. Stat. § 943.201 
Wyoming Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 6-3-901 
U.S. Virgin Islands 14 VI Code Ann. §§ 3003  
 
Preventing False Identity Fraud 
Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel 
In September 2006, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the Better 
Business Bureau (BBB) established the Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards 
Panel (IDSP) 4 as a cross-sector initiative to catalog existing standards related to identity theft 
prevention and to identify areas where additional standards and best practices are needed to 
help businesses and other organizations further prevent identity fraud. In January 2008, the 
IDSP released a two-volume report providing a detailed inventory of standards and best 
practices that can be used to prevent identity theft and a number of recommendations for 
security enhancements around the issuance of identity credentials and the exchange and 
maintenance of identity data. The ANSI-BBB IDSP Report, available for downloading at no 
charge at www.ansi.org/idsp, is a useful tool for businesses, government agencies, and other 
organizations that wish to evaluate and augment their current identity theft prevention and 
identity management practices. 
 
Consumer Protection Measures 
How do you protect yourself and your clients from identity theft? Some of the useful 
methods are: 
• Before providing personal information, make sure the individual or business requesting 
it has a valid reason for requiring the information. 
• Never write your credit card numbers or Social Security number on checks or on the 
outside of envelopes. 
• Don’t give account numbers over the telephone or to persons/companies you are not 
familiar with. 
                                                          
4 Report Summary: Excerpts from Final Report – Volume 1: Findings and Recommendations. Published by 
the ANSI-BBB Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel, January 31, 2008. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1768                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Don’t use cordless or cellular telephones or e-mail to transmit financial or private 
personal information. 
• Keep all financial documents in a secure place. 
• If you have your driver’s license information pre-printed on your checks, shred canceled 
checks before discarding them. 
• Check your financial information regularly looking for what should and shouldn’t  
be there. 
• Obtain a copy of your credit report on a regular basis. 
• Tear up or shred pre-approved credit applications. 
• Have yourself taken off of “pre-screened lists.” 
• Mail bills from the post office or your business location 
• Consider having your name and telephone number removed from the telephone 
directory or having the address removed. 
• Don’t provide personal information over the telephone unless you initiated the call and 
know who you are speaking with. 
• If telemarketing companies call, tell them: “Under the federal Telephone Consumer 
Protection Act, I want to be on your ‘do not call’ list.” 
• Keep your birth certificate in a safe place. 
• Choose passwords that will be difficult to crack and use different passwords for  
all accounts. 
• Change passwords and PIN codes often. 
• Don’t put your Social Security number on any document that you aren’t legally  
required to. 
• Shred any papers with financial information and identifiers rather than simply throwing 
them in the trash. 
 
In addition, insurance companies are now offering insurance for identity theft. For an annual 
fee, the policy covers the cost of clearing the policyholder’s name and correcting their 
financial records including legal expenses, loan re-application fees, telephone and certified 
mailing charges, notary expenses, and lost wages for the time it takes to deal with the fraud. 
 
What to Do If Your Identity Is Stolen 
• Start keeping detailed records. 
• File a police report with your local law enforcement agency and keep a copy of that 
report. Many banks and credit agencies require such a report before they will 
acknowledge that a theft has occurred.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1769 
• If your wallet or purse is stolen, immediately cancel your credit and debit cards and get 
replacements. Put a “stop payment” on all lost or stolen checks. 
• Report unauthorized charges and accounts to the appropriate credit issuers and credit 
bureaus immediately by phone and in writing. Change account numbers or close all 
accounts that are affected by the fraudulent activity. 
• Check for and repair further breaches of your identity. 
• Notify law enforcement agencies: 
? Federal Trade Commission (www.ftc.gov) 
? Federal Bureau of Investigation (www.fbi.gov) 
? Local and state agencies 
• Contact the three primary credit reporting bureaus to have a security alert or freeze 
placed on your report, and request a copy of your credit report and review it for 
unauthorized account activity: 
? Equifax (800) 525-6285 or (888) 766-0008 
? Experian (formerly TRW) (888) 397-3742 
? Trans Union (800) 680-7289 
 
For further information on identify theft, please visit the Federal Trade Commission’s 
information page at www.consumer.gov/idtheft/. 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1801 



:


consum fraud
complaint of consum fraud can be found as far back as the first centuri when plini the
elder told of the adulter honei be sold in rome and the mix of wine with gypsum
lime pitch rosin wood ash salt sulphur and other artifici addit
scheme against consum rang from home repair fraud to more sophist scam in
a nationwid solicit l00000 peopl purchas light bulb becaus thei were persuad
that the profit were go to the disabl thei were but the disabl certifi by doctor
includ such crippl disord as acn hai fever nervous and obes those
donat paid about three time the go price for similar light bulb
sometim fraud occur when the immedi victim cannot fight back a tennesse funer
director wa charg with buri peopl without casket and throw trash in on top of
the corps
scandal involv the ministri especi televis evangel also have captur
headlin in l988 us evangelist jim bakker wa indict on mail fraud charg stem
from the televis sale of lifetim partnership in a vacat hotel at the heritag usa
theme park prosecutor were abl to document that bakker and hi wife tammi fai
receiv about 35 million in bonus from the scheme bakker receiv a 45year prison
sentenc which later wa reduc he is now out of prison
fraud is notabl common in the repair and servic industri home repair fraud frequent
perpetr against the elderli rang from the sale or us of substandard materi such as
roof to secur payment without do ani work at all automobil repair often
involv fraudul act on studi maintain that 53 cent of everi repair dollar wa
wast becaus of unnecessari work overcharg servic never perform or
incompet a us govern survei conclud that american motorist ar
overcharg an averag of l50 a car each year
in australia john braithwait found that us car dealer roll back odomet on a third
of the car thei offer for sale interview with the dealer in australia illustr the kind of
reason that can buttress such illeg activ on salesman said peopl pai too much
attent to the mileag read on a car there might be a car with a low mileag read
but all sort of fault and anoth perfect car with a high mileag read it doesnt matter
consum fraud financi transact
11702 2011 fraud examin manual
what the mileag read is but how good the car is so if you turn the mileag read back
on a car in perfect order your encourag peopl to bui a good car there wa no
evid howev that it wa onli on good car that the odomet wa made to provid a
lower read
anoth australian dealer said thei think becaus you ar a us car dealer you ar a liar
so thei treat you like on and lie to you can you blame the dealer for ly back 1
con scheme
confid game involv a rang of fraudul conduct usual commit by profession
con artist against unsuspect victim the victim can be organ but more
commonli ar individu con men usual act alon but thei mai group togeth for a
particular complex endeavor
these ar some of the mani kind of confid scheme telemarket scheme and
pyramid scheme ar discuss in more detail at the end of the chapter
advanc fee swindl and debt consolid scheme
advanc fee swindl ar structur to obtain an illeg gain by fals promis the deliveri
of a product or a servic in some scheme the product is market to a larg number of
custom and then the oper is shut down prior to the deliveri stage
peopl who find themselv in debt sometim turn to consolid agenc for help
these agenc do not advanc loan but rather act as an intermediari between debtor and
creditor some agenc ar legitim mani ar not
in a typic scenario the debtor contact the agenc which compil a list of the creditor
and the amount of monthli payment the agenc usual write letter to the creditor
request a workout plan at lower monthli payment spread over a longer period of time
the creditor will often offer such an arrang if thei feel that the debt will therebi be
paid or if the workout plan will forestal bankruptci or default by the creditor
1john braithwait an exploratori studi of us car fr aud in paul r wilson and john braithwait ed
two face of devianc brisban univers of queensland press 1978 pp 101122
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11703
unscrupul debt consolid scheme often involv the agenc collect the monei
from the debtor but not forward it to the creditor in some instanc consider time
can pass befor the debtor find out that hi monei ha been misappropri
anoth variat of the debt consolid scheme occur when a custom is guarante
that he will receiv a loan or a credit card regardless of hi credit rate typic the victim
have been reject by legitim financi institut becaus their credit rate ar poor
the victim must pai a process fee for the applic to be accept after the victim
pai the fee the con artist disappear
directori advertis scheme
the essenc of directori advertis scheme is the sale of advertis in a nonexist
magazin or directori a fake or in some case a real directori is shown to the potenti
victim the victim contract and pai for displai or classifi advertis that is to appear
some month in the futur by that time the fraudster ha disappear
merchandis scheme
merchandis scheme run a wide gamut if you have ever paid for an item and receiv
less than what wa advertis you have been the victim of a merchandis scheme
person improv fraud
these fraud prei upon the desir of peopl to improv their educ or job skill in some
instanc thei appeal to a person appear
diploma mill
for what is often a hefti fee a diploma can be purchas by those who appli the fraudster
usual claim that the fee is for process the applic or for verifi the experi
necessari for the degre to be award the hallmark of the diploma mill is the eas with
which the degre is obtain though the degre becaus the school is not accredit is
essenti worthless
correspond school mai also oper with the same modu operandi as diploma mill
investig have at time submit the scribbl of their infant children to school that
advertis that thei will provid art lesson to person who demonstr talent usual the
infant draw ar judg to show consider abil and the submitt is ask to
send a fee to begin receiv the lesson
consum fraud financi transact
11704 2011 fraud examin manual
model school
model school appeal to the vaniti of some peopl in the typic scheme the model
school repres tell the prospect student that he will prepar a portfolio of portrait
to be sent to potenti custom who mai emploi the victim as a model the victim is then
charg an inflat price for the pictur con game model school often claim
inaccur connect to famou peopl and maintain that thei have been instrument
in start the career of success model the school sometim target parent and
grandpar with lure of the monei that can be earn by their exception pretti
infant children or grandchildren
direct debit from check account
when a custom decid to purchas an item from a catalog or over the phone he is told
he can purchas it rapidli and simpli by give hi bank name and hi check account
number for a direct debit from hi account thi result in unauthor withdraw from
the account
equityskim scheme
fall for thi scam can cost consum their home con men try to talk the mark out of
the equiti on their home and mai try to persuad them to borrow against their equiti
fundrais nonprofit and religi scheme
some group us cancer or aid in their titl to convinc the consum thei ar
legitim charit organ other o ffer a prize or award for the consum as a
reward for their contribut
homebas busi
a popular fad todai mani compani market homebas busi requir a person to
bui materi for assemblyathom product the consum is promis that the compani
will purchas the complet product and when it doe not the consum is left with a bad
invest and a stock of cheap worthless good
home improv
a common scam involv phoni repair peopl sell their servic doortodoor after
pai them to fix a roof window or other item the consum is left with unfinish repair
work and no workmen
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11705
monei manag or financi planner
these scam involv convinc mark to invest in lowrisk highreturn opportun of
cours consum who invest in these opportun see no return at all
phone card scheme
the con artist call claim to be with the consum long distanc compani and ask to
confirm their card number if the number is reveal the consum next long distanc bill
will contain some expens call he did not make
scaveng or reveng scheme
thi involv the compani that initi con the consum us a differ compani
name the outfit contact the consum again and ask if he would like to help put the
uneth compani out of busi and get hi monei back natur an upfront fee is
requir to financ the investig
sweepstak giveawai and prize
mani of these socal free gift requir the consum to pai a fee usual label a
ship fee befor collect thi fee actual cover the cost of the merchandis
deem free
colleg scholarship servic
thi bogu servic usual charg an upfront fee or advanc payment fee for find a
scholarship suitabl for the applic
credit repair
some of these firm mai charg unnecessari fee to fix credit problem know that the
consum could easili call the credit bureau and request a copi of hi credit report himself
other con scheme
block hustl
socal becaus purveyor of cheap stereo equip jewelri and watch usual hawk
their good on street corner or at traffic light the item for sale ar gener either stolen
or imit of brand name
consum fraud financi transact
11706 2011 fraud examin manual
pigeon drop
thi is often us on middleag or elderli women who ar like to have a save
account pretend to find a wallet full of monei the con men convinc their mark that
thei should divid the discov monei as a show of good faith each should withdraw
a sum of monei from their bank and turn it over to a lawyer or anoth thirdparti for
safekeep thei agre to place an ad in a newspap for the lost wallet if it is not claim
within a certain amount of time thei will split the monei of cours when the design
time expir the victim will find that the lawyer wa part of the scam and that her monei ha
vanish
bank examin swindl
bank examin swindl ar also perpetr on older women especi widow with access
to their husband life insur polici the con man imperson a bank examin
investig her bank he ask her to withdraw a certain amount of cash from her account
place it in an envelop and allow him to inspect the bill for counterfeit mani con men us
fals id and dress to take on thi role
jamaican handkerchief or envelop switch
in thi con the crimin put hi monei into an envelop with the mark monei and then
unobtrus trade thi parcel for anoth that look like the same thing but is instead
bulk up with worthless paper
the obituari hustl
capit on a bereav person grief the con man cull inform from an obituari
pose as a deliveri person collect monei for a packag or other order the deceas
supposedli made
threecard mont
an old card game that involv two peopl who fleec an unsuspect onlook into a
rig game
poker bunco
thi scam can involv poker dice pool and other game the con man is of cours an
expert and hustl the mark
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11707
missingheir scheme
in the modern version of thi scam the con man pose as a probat investig or other
genealogist charg fee to distribut an inherit
gold mine swindl
here the con man claim to own a product mine but requir monei to start oper
the scheme involv sell share to the mine
spanish prison game
thi con can be trace back to the spanish armada of the sixteenth centuri a businessman
receiv a letter purportedli from a hostag held prison in some foreign land he need
monei to bribe hi captor or pai a ransom as collater a treasur map or other valuabl
paper ar often enclos
murphi game
also known as miss murphi paddi hustl or carpet game the tradit con is
plai in place where prostitut occur the con artist plai a pimp but never deliv the
prostitut
badger game
a refin version of miss murphi but in thi con the con woman or prostitut is in on the
scam the con artist rob the mark of hi wallet through simpl theft or pretens of
blackmail
goat pastur scam
the mark receiv a call from a person who sai he from an oil and ga servic that is
sponsor a lotteri on miner right if the consum invest a certain tax deduct sum
thei can receiv a percentag of the incom in royalti payment
other common hustl occur in the privaci of on own home or through telephon
solicit ie boiler room
consum fraud financi transact
11708 2011 fraud examin manual
telemarkt fraud
victim of telemarket fraud ar swindl out of more than 40 billion a year accord
to on survei 92 percent of us adult sai thei have receiv postcard or letter promis
thei had definit been award a guarante prize of those respond 69 percent
never receiv the promis prize telemarket select victim deliber target the
elderli and the unemploi over 55 million american said thei had bought item by
telephon in the past two year and were exploit in the process
while the telephon newspap and postal servic us to be the kei tool of telemarket
the internet ha afford fraudster a more fast pace and anonym method of carri
out their scheme the number on scam to be current found on the internet sai the
nation consum leagu fraud watch ncl is the fake check scam in which
consum ar paid with a phoni check for work or item sold and ar instruct to wire
monei back thi ha been the number on rank telemarket fraud for two year
run advanc fee scam and phish also rank in the top 10 scheme on the world
wide web a discuss of some of the specif internet scheme can be found in the
comput and internet fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud
examin manual
telemarket offens ar classifi as consum fraud yet mani busi ar affect by
offic suppli and market servic scam the hitandrun natur of phone room the
geograph distanc between the crook and their victim and the resourc and prioriti
of law enforc agenc all make enforc effort difficult onli about on in 100
victim ever file a complaint
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11709
ncl top 10 telemarket fraud
2008 top 10 fraud
2009 top 10 fraud
fake check scam 61 fake check scam 52
prizessweepstak 12 prizessweepstak 21
phish 105 phish 13
advanc fee loanscredit arrang 2 internet gener merchandis 3
lotterieslotteri ticket club 2 scholarshipseduc grant 1
internet gener merchandis 15 advanc fee loanscredit arrang 1
magazin 15 magazin sale 1
scholarshipseduc grant 1 lotterieslotteri ticket club 1
offic ad spacedirectori list ing 1 telephon cram 5
credit card issu 5 busi opportunitiesfranchis 5
telemarket terminolog
term in the scammer vocabulari includ bang or nail the custom in other word
close the deal a salesperson most effect skill is puf the abil to sound convinc
while exagger the valu of a busi opportun or gift to make the puf more
persuas market hire singer or crier to tell potenti victim what a great deal thei ar
get call from angri custom who realiz thei have been swindl ar known as heat
call these ar handl by someon claim to be the compani manag or vicepresid
boiler room staff
work in a boiler room is share by fronter closer and verifi
fronter
the fronter call victim and make the initi pitch thi lowlevel worker is usual
break into the busi and read from a script to the prospect custom fronter
seldom see the merchandis or know the full extent of the oper keep fronter in
the dark at least in theori limit what thei can tell investig and protect them in the
event of prosecut
closer
the closer is a veteran fronter pass an interest caller to their closer identifi as the
firm manag who convinc the person to bui
consum fraud financi transact
11710 2011 fraud examin manual
verifi
next the caller is pass to a verifi who read some vagu word about the deal and
record the person agreement these record ar intention vagu leav out the
pitch and kei detail essenti record onli the custom consent verifi also stall
custom who call back to complain heat call find reason why a littl more patienc
will solv the problem and in some case convinc the person to send a littl more monei
to help the process along
staff exploit
the custom of fraudul telemarket oper ar not the onli victim fronter ar
often poorli educ and easili taken advantag of by the career crimin who run the
oper salespeopl mai face hidden cost in a work agreement similar to the on
involv in the item thei push on unsuspect custom for exampl boiler room
oper hold back part of their phone list and sell them to crew member as hot lead
telescam veteran know how to oper a gift sting that bilk both the custom and the
salesperson oper overst the retail valu of the gift so the custom get less than
thei paid for then by give agent an inflat wholesal cost the oper can pai these
worker less commiss which is figur on the profit margin between wholesal
and retail
the salespeopl in boiler room ar sometim as desper as their victim most ar
unemploi with littl educ or market skill telemarket promis easi work
and big pai without ani experi mani pe opl who start out as fronter howev ar
serv an apprenticeship in their crimin career thei ar woo with car cellular
phone and other perk former worker have report that supervisor sprinkl line of
cocain along the phone bank tabl and threw hand of monei into the air promis the
proce to whoever made the next sale
natur there ar no social secur or payrol tax deduct from paycheck so
employe can ow big tax bill at the end of the year fronter commiss payment ar
often short or withheld paycheck frequent fail to clear the bank owner promis big
profit share for a month or two then shut down the busi thei tell the worker that
their asset have been frozen by creditor or regul worker lose their job and usual
their last week commiss for the last few month howev the owner have been
take in 25000 to 30000 a week
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11711
telemarket supplier
the telemarket industri reli on a number of sourc to suppli it phone script mail
list merchandis phone bank and autodial mail list and phone list ar sold for a
few cent per name list of peopl who have been stung befor or who have bad credit
record fetch between 10 and fifteen cent per name by suppli telemarket with the
tool of their trade these compani make telescam possibl mani of the supplier ar
awar of telemarket crimin intent and choos to ignor them
turnkei
turnkei compris an industri of their own by provid the collater a telemarket scam
need turnkei launder credit card receipt and check sell autodial and phone list and
provid the merchandis portrai as valuabl prize
legitim busi howev ar routin implic in thi scurril industri the us
postal servic for instanc carri ton of telemarket ad in the earli dai of the
industri telemarket us the postal servic to deliv merchandis cod but when the
postal servic mount an aggress campaign against fraud compani turn to credit
card bill to avoid the scrutini thei also us parcel deliveri servic or overnight
which ar not subject to feder mail fraud law by keep the valu of the merchandis
just below 300 telemarket avoid the minimum amount at which postal inspector ar
requir to investig fraud
independ servic organ
telemarket often have difficulti secur credit card servic from reput institut
mani bank will not open creditprocess a ccount for busi who do a substanti
amount of their busi in phone sale becaus these account typic incur a high rate of
chargeback feder law give consum 60 dai to protest charg to their card and if
success the issuer ha to absorb the loss mastercard and visa estim their loss from
phone fraud at 300 million a year
telemarket oper have learn the difficulti thei face when deal directli with
bank to circumv thi obstacl phone sale compani hire independ servic
organ which approach bank on the telemarket behalf the servic compani
agre with the bank to cover ani chargeback from the oper the telemarket is
requir to post a larg bond to cover potenti loss so the servic organ is also
protect from loss howev even with a halfmillion dollar bond the reserv fund can be
consum fraud financi transact
11712 2011 fraud examin manual
quickli deplet when custom start to realiz thei have been swindl leav the servic
compani andor the bank with enorm loss
factor compani
telemarket oper also commonli engag factor compani these group bui
credit card receipt from telemarket concern at a discount then us their merchant bank
account to convert the receipt into cash some factor charg as much as 30 percent of the
receipt gross valu to launder the slip factor is illeg in some state though crook
find wai to slip through loophol or disguis their allianc
intern factor compani
factor through asian and european merchant is becom increasingli common
factor compani in these countri tend to charg a lower price for their servic than
some other countriesbetween nine and 10 percent of the gross regardless of their local
factor have the opportun to make a great profit thei also howev face the risk that
bank will freez their account or sue them for excess chargeback in respons to the
loss suffer at the hand of dishonest telemarket bank and credit card compani
have start review their account to locat those busi with inordin number of
chargeback the financi institut close these account and mai file suit if the account
holder can be locat
checkcash establish
anoth conveni tool at the telemarket dispos is the checkcash store if a boiler
room oper wish to avoid the risk of set up a bank account that might be trace
or seiz custom person check ar taken to a compani that cash them for a small
fee these establish rare requir ani identif to cash the check custom mai
complain and try to stop payment on their check but thei ar ordinarili too late
common telemarket scam
senior scam
older peopl ar the favorit prei of telescamm in the us thei make up 11 percent of
the popul but constitut 32 percent of the victim of consum fraud and 50 percent of
all phone scam victim fortyf percent of senior citizen have been offer invest
by a person unknown to them senior own more than half of all financi asset in the us
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11713
fred schult author of fleec relat the pitch deliv to an elderli woman in
philadelphia by tim oneil the woman told detect about the more than 10000 for
which oneil and hi lieuten swindl her oneil call to mollifi the woman protest
wa record by the fbi on the line he insist the collect the woman bought
includ actual bullet excav from the civil war ar genuin and valuabl
do you wear pendant thi is a beauti is a diamond im not gonna ask you to
spend a penni
how old ar you god bless you 89
were gonna get that out to you look for it in the middl of next week and then give
us a call and then let us know how you like it
well i hope i put a littl sunshin in your dai okai honei and god bless you oh dont
cry now were here to take care of you well be here and if you need to talk to anybodi
at ani time you give us a call okai bye bye and god bless you
telemarket usual call in the even nighttim call find peopl of everi ag in more
impuls mood senior mai be more vulner to pitch promis them extra monei
and luxuri good becaus mani live on fix incom these lotterystyl gambit can seem
like an easi wai for the elderli to improv their financi statu
target the unemploi
the unemploi ar anoth favorit target for sweepstak pitch and job search servic
wherea the system ha left the jobless without hope the telemarket offer a wai
around offici channel peopl with bad credit pai telemarket to repair their credit
record or get a major card instead thei get a list of bank that offer credit card commonli
publish in newspap or an applic for a card that requir a secur deposit for
activ usual sever hundr or a thousand dollar these peopl ar also target by
advancefe loan scam which promis loan in exchang for a fee
affin fraud
affin fraud target group of peopl who have some social connect neighborhood
chiefli popul by racial minor especi immigr group ar often the site of
affin fraud religi and profession ti ar often exploit market technolog ha
consum fraud financi transact
11714 2011 fraud examin manual
made it possibl for a compani to bui target list not just by locat but accord to
bui habit leisur time activ and club membership the most expens list carri
the name of peopl who have alreadi fallen for a telemarket scam thi is call reload
chief among telescamm trick is obfusc salespeopl read off list of prize
emphas bigticket item like jewelri and car not mention that the odd of actual
win anyth besid a trinket ar astronom schult relat an incid in which
victim were told thei had won a winnebago victim were ask to pai a handl fee of
2900 a fraction of the cost of a new travel home about two month later victim found a
deliveri driver at their door with a winnebago tent
some oper actual encourag their mark to call and check with the better busi
bureau bbb and with former custom give out the number for the person to call
these number ring at phoni line set up by the scammer who give out a glow
recommend phone room have been known to set up refer arm with titl like
the better busi bureau of america or intern better busi bureau to
recommend their ventur if a potenti victim doe reach the better busi bureau
chanc ar the report will contain littl or noth of us the inform in these file is
usual ambigu and out of date
consol
when irat custom call telemarket back to complain their call ar rout to
profession who placat the caller with more promis and obfusc some boiler
room have a prearrang commun rout for lead complaint through four or five
differ depart thi tactic caus mani caller to eventu hang up without
have spoken to anyon in some instanc telemarket confront with furiou caller
threaten legal action do award someth of valu to the custom though the item is
usual worth far less than the person ha paid
if obfusc and consol prize fail to appeas the caller the con turn to threat and
intimid thi is a favorit method for deal with senior citizen especi elderli
women threat ar us not just to keep custom from file complaint but to cajol
more monei out of them some telemarket have actual threaten caller person
safeti if thei refus to pai
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11715
the odd in favor of catch a boiler room oper in progress ar usual poor
oper can select a town set up a room make their haul and leav again in a matter of
week or month when author raid a boiler room the oper ha typic alreadi
move on if the compani owner regist with state regul thei probabl did so
under an alia by the time polic arriv the perpetr have move on and the chanc of
find them ar slim
800 number
tollfre 800 number or other tollfre prefix such as 866 877 or 888 offer by
phone servic compani ar us by some oper the scam is a tollfre line
advertis in mailer flier and newspap ad to lure victim into make the call
themselv the tollfre number usual carri a record that direct custom to a 900
number that charg the caller between 3 and 10 a minut to hear record messag a
favorit devic of seller is to insist that the offer be made is good for less than 48 hour
to secur the opportun the custom hand over a cashier check to an overnightdeliveri
servic even if the victim doe have second thought he will be unabl to stop
payment on a cashier check
automat debit
the person check account is on of the most conveni tool for defraud
telemarket custom thank to advanc in electron bank technolog us
computer transfer busi can set up an automat debit to the buyer account
telemarket oper us thi devic to obtain payment befor victim can chang their
mind about their purchas wors telemarket can simpli us the inform to drain
the victim account thi inform is usua lly obtain by tell the victim that the
account number ar need to verifi elig for a giveawai or busi opportun
bank ar not respons for ani loss custom suffer in thi wai so there ar no
chargeback and littl recours for the swindl custom besid file a complaint even if
an investig of the complaint bring the scammer to court the chanc that the victim
will receiv restitut ar poor
busi opportun biz op
mani telemarket fraud ar aim at peopl start their own busi regul put
loss in fraudul busi opportun at over 100 million a year and most observ
think the number is far higher
consum fraud financi transact
11716 2011 fraud examin manual
workathom scheme
besid franchis offer and other miscellan busi scam the most preval fraud
involv workathom scheme and fccrelat invest victim of these phoni
offer do not see themselv as part of the telemarket prei thei believ thei ar
make a legitim busi invest
biz op promot often us a team approach in their enterpris the victim usual see an
ad and call a fronter who make the introductori pitch and then pass the victim to a
higherup next the caller is put through to a crier who endors the opportun and tell
the victim of the profit he made final a closer seal the deal and get the payment secur
as quickli as possibl
telemarket us businessrel term such as exclus territori annual gross revenu and
emerg market in these call thi help convinc the mark that the biz op is legitim a
loui harri poll found that 1 in 33 cold call for invest were success
some businesspitch oper ar complet fabric thei offer envelop stuf or
bookreview enterpris that do not realli exist scammer mail out postcard or bui cheap
ad in magazin and newspap some mai not even take ani phone call the ad
convinc the victim to send monei to a mailbox unlik the us postal servic which
requir identif from renter and divulg thi inform to anyon who inquir
privat compani will rent maildrop to anyon for a few dollar a month and can refus to
sai who paid for the box
fly and bui
some scam involv ventur such as vend machin pai phone and merchandis
displai rack thei often gain credibl by set up a front oper and invit
investor for tour thi part of the ruse is known as the fly and bui for exampl the
secur divis of the state of washington prosecut a case on behalf of a woman who
travel to colorado and met with a promot the promot offer to let her in on a deal
for video pool and video bowl game thrill with the demonstr and her tour
guid promis of quick profit she paid 13000 for machin that broke down in less
than three month when the woman complain to the promot about the shoddi of
the machin she wa sent two new on along with a bill
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11717
shoddi merchandis is a familiar element of the biz op scam the scam ar tailor for the
target audienc a maryland ring ran advertis in incom plu magazin and other
investorori public for a solarpow car batteri recharg in second your
off and run the ad claim the offer state that distributor were make over
200000 a year with the revolutionari devic but the machin were worthless on
investor took the recharg to an electrician and wa told it could recharg a batteri but that
it would take a few week
vend machin and pai phone scam
buyer ar promis exclus territori but find the same area ha been sold to mani
peopl often the machin do not work or thei simpli do not make ani monei sooner or
later the ruse is expos but in the short term the oper can make substanti proce
entrepreneuri enterpris
telemarket deal not onli in machineryori scam like those abov the rais of
exot anim like ostrich and emu for luxuri item and for slaughter ha been a popular
scam for a while includ weekend retreat to a model farm for wouldb rancher in the
last 10 year the 900 telephon number servic ha been us to swindl those who set out
to be swindler themselv peopl ar convinc thei can make a fortun charg between
3 and 10 a minut for record messag provid entertain psychic read or
inform avail for free from other sourc
scam involv comput technolog ar usual success due to the layman lack of
knowledg in that field although around 80 percent of american household own some
type of comput few actual understand the intric detail of how comput function
whatev the natur of the opportun there ar sign that indic that it is not legitim
among the most common
classifi ad urg the prospect to call an 800 number
wild unsubstanti claim about potenti earn
promis about exclus territori assur about good locat or the assist
of a profession locat
refer specifi by the compani
consum fraud financi transact
11718 2011 fraud examin manual
the lack of a complet disclosur document contain inform about the
promot experi lawsuit histori audit financi statement and substanti
for earn assert
invent scheme
in order to crack down on oper that offer fraudul invent promot the ftc
recent launch project mousetrap us ad these oper solicit inventor to
submit their product idea to the promot firm which supposedli special in bring
new product to the market invent ar supposedli evalu and apprais and nearli
alwai endors the firm offer to submit the product to manufactur for a fee
the us feder trade commiss charg the american institut for research and
develop inc aird and it predecessor american inventor corpor aic
with run a decept inventionspromot scheme that bilk consum nationwid
out of thousand of dollar each over a 20year time span promot us print ad in
person and telephon sale present to offer two basic servic 1 a feasibl
report price from 250 to 495 to evalu the patent and market of the
inventor product and 2 a represent ag reement that promis to prepar file and
prosecut a patent applic and to promot the product to industri repres the
represent agreement cost from 5490 to 11990 the complaint alleg that the firm
obtain design patent which have littl or no commerci valu instead of the util
patent thei promis furthermor peopl were told that onli a select few invent were
accept when virtual everi person who appli wa brought into the program aird and
aic also encourag their custom to expect huge financi gain when the trade
commiss charg in 20 year of busi perhap no more than 13 custom have
realiz ani financi gain at all as a result of the compani servic
victim receiv a useless recommend for their product and a code from the us
bureau of standard industri code sic the code gener a list of manufactur who
make product similar to the inventor but regul sai the list of manufactur that
come from classifi your idea with the sic usual ar of limit valu some victim
thought thei were secur a patent in their promot deal but instead receiv onli a
disclosur document from the us patent offic avail to the gener public for 10
the document is not a patent but a statement of evid of the date of concept of the
invent and doe not guarante right to ani futur product
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11719
employ servic
the phoni employ servic is similar in natur to the biz op prei on the
unemploi these scam promis good job mani of them oversea with the ad
entic of taxfre wage victim pai bet ween 250 and 1000 for the servic some
get list of govern job which ar usual avail for free or list from classifi
ad most get noth
credit servic
the simplest credit scam promis that the compani will secur a loan for the applic
regardless of credit histori and refer if the person pai an upfront fee usual between
35 and 75 check account debit ar a favorit payment method as ar 900 number
which charg by the minut up to 40 or 50 per call to hear inform wide avail
that provid no help in swai a loan for the listen usual there ar few or no loan
made occasion loan inform and applic mai be mail out to the victim but
usual after the fee ha been paid the oper ar not heard from again
credit repair scam
similar to loan scam ar those that promis to repair credit pitch men like to sai thei can
wipe awai or doctor or cosmetic blotch on credit insinu thei have wai of
chang or disguis a person credit histori despit the fact that there is realli no wai to
eras bad credit mani peopl fall for thi scam pai hundr of dollar to expung
their record
primer credit card
in thi scam telemarket compani assur custom thei can get major card for a small
fee even if their credit report is poor victim receiv an applic for a mastercard which
thei could obtain in ani depart store telemarket also push secur card which
requir a cash deposit usual a 250300 minimum to the issuer bank to activ
the card
gold card
a rel new credit card sting on the internet tout gold card statu for custom
regardless of credit histori the advertis claim applic will be process for a
major credit card in actual applic ar mere assist in file an applic for a
major credit card a worthless servic sinc applic ar quit simpl to complet and
submit for a larg upfront fee particip receiv a catalog card which is onli
consum fraud financi transact
11720 2011 fraud examin manual
redeem if the holder bui the compani overpr lowqual merchandis list in
the catalog as discount for cardhold even then an actual purchas mai requir pai
addit fee or cash deposit befor the custom is allow to charg the remaind
sinc the issuer do not report payment activ to ani of the credit report bureau us
the card doe not improv the custom credit rate
lotterieslotteri club
consum receiv a fals claim that thei have won or can get help to win a lotteri often in
a foreign countri most lotteri scam ar perpetr by con artist in other countri
sometim us us address to disguis their real locat sometim the lotteri
actual exist but invit to plai dont come from govern that oper legitim
lotteri or anyon connect to them the consum ha no wai of assur that thei will
receiv the ticket that thei pai for or in the unlik event that thei do win will ever be
abl to collect their monei potenti victim need to rememb that it is illeg to us the
mail or telephon to plai lotteri across border us law prohibit it not onli across
nation border but state line as well the consum could be accus of illeg activ
just by particip differ in legal system difficulti of conduct investig in
other countri and expens and other complic involv in pursu crossbord
fraud make the chanc of a consum get hi monei back veri veri slim
buyer club
thi scheme involv membership in discount bui club that consum never agre to
join or were sign up for through freetrial offer consum should bewar of
advertis for product at incred cheap price or free if the consum pai for
ship these offer mai be design to lure the consum into a buyer club membership
anoth wai to avoid be a victim of a buyer club scheme is to understand how a trial
offer work in mani case the consum will automat be charg for a membership
when the freetrial expir unless thei contact the club to cancel the consum should
ask for the detail of all membership offer in write befor thei agre to join if
unauthor charg or debit ar notic on monthli statement the consum should
contact their credit card issuer or bank and ask for their account to be credit for these
unauthor charg
travelvac scheme
offer of free or discount travel that never materi consum need to be skeptic of
offer for free trip airlin and other wellknown compani sometim oper contest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11721
for travel prize howev there ar also compani that offer free trip to try to lure
peopl into bui their product or servic consum also need to know what is includ
with the trip a free or incred cheap trip mai have hidden cost for instanc the
cruis mai be free but the consum ha to pai to fly to the departur point and stai in a
hotel at their own expens or thei mai have to endur a long highpressur sale pitch for
a timeshar or travel club membership as part of the trip often the best travel deal ar onli
avail for offpeak time not dure school vacat holidai or other popular
travel date
to avoid be victim of travelvac scheme consum should confirm all travel
arrang if transport and hotel ar includ in the travel packag ask how to
contact those compani and confirm with them directli that the reserv have been
made consum should do their own travel research it easi to get inform from a
local travel agent or other sourc such as newspap book and the internet when
make travel arrang it is advis to pai with a credit card fraudul travel
oper can take a consum monei and run and even legitim compani can go out
of busi pai with a credit card allow the consum to disput the charg if the
promis that ar made ar not kept
slam
slam occur when a consum telephon or electr servic is switch from their
current compani to anoth on without their permiss long distanc is the most
common target of telephon slam but it can also happen with local or localtol servic
consum should read the fine print on all contest entri form coupon and other
promot materi as these might includ an agreement to switch phone servic feder
law requir that written agreement to chang phone servic must be separ document
not part of a prize packag or other materi if the compani offer a check for the
consum to switch the check must clearli state on the front and on the back in the
signatur area that the consum is agre to chang their servic
consum should alwai check their phone bill carefulli if the consum notic a new
compani name he should call the number that list on that portion of the bill and ask for
an explan if he ha been slam he should inform the compani that he did not agre
to us it servic he should then contact hi origin phone compani and ask to be
reinstat to hi old call plan under feder law the consum can switch back for free
and thei dont have to pai for the first 30 dai of servic from the slammer
consum fraud financi transact
11722 2011 fraud examin manual
real estat
real estat scam ar easili recogn there is almost alwai an element of time pressur
with the victim be convinc thei ar particip in a onceinalifetim nowor
never deal the investor ar led to believ there is no time to investig the ventur and
that if thei hesit thei will miss the opportun to make a fortun promis of big profit
for littl or no involv ar the norm in real estat scam the investor is also misl into
assum thei ar be let in on a special offer or an exclus deal by the promot
sinc the 1920 when thousand of american bought swampland in florida real estat ha
serv as a conduit for fraud a moderndai variat ha dispens with the actual land
entir and simpli sell inform compani tout the rich avail in real estat
through seminar and book that claim to offer secret wai to cash in the custom pai
for the secret info and get worthless tip in return
timeshar
anoth scam sell timeshar in condominium for vacation telemarket pass
themselv off as broker to condominium owner and purport to special in sell
timeshar
option
ad in the real estat section of newspap coax investor into bui option on
properti supposedli the option lock in a presentdai price on behalf of the purchas
who can exercis the option later if he wish to bui the land or to sell it at a profit
sometim the investor ha bought noth but a piec of paper the agent ha no
author to make deal on the properti occasion the option is onli valid for a few
month or is too vagu word to be enforc usual there is an actual plot of land
but in most instanc it is undevelop due to locat or zone restrict and is
therefor worthless
develop properti
the gener develop corpor of florida ran a legendari land fraud scam in which
potenti investor were shown lot and hous guarante to make them rich in thi
render of the buyandfli sham victim were shepherd and their contract restrict
until thei sign a deal for a lot the scam continu for approxim six year and cost
victim million
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11723
artrar item
land deal prei on the public rever for real estat the con who deal in art object
prei on a similar impuls the rever for the rare paint worth littl more than their
canva and oil ar tag as masterpiec sure to grow in valu the victim who fall for
these scam ar art novic who seem to unquestioningli believ the dealer apprais of
the objet dart
thi sort of will victim will bui lithograph print massproduc by the thousand
think thei ar purchas a limit edit ani anxieti the victim mai develop ar
calm by a promis 30dai no oblig trial and with certif of authent
accord to the ftc the most popular artist to counterfeit ar salvador dali pablo
picasso marc chagal and joan miro
collect and memorabilia
collect and household decor item such as vase bricabrac and figurin ar also
commonli hawk by telemarket again these supposedli valuabl object ar noth
more than cheap shoddi merchandis war memorabilia is especi popular particularli
item relat to the world war ii document and keepsak from ani bygon era ar on
the fraudul telemarket bestsel list stamp ar sold as rare when thei ar in
fact worthless
coin ar anoth prime moneymak for telemarket certif of authent and
apprais ar includ with the merchandis to reassur custom but needless to
sai these document ar usual produc by the sale compani or doctor from a
legitim origin
preciou stone
gem ar gener regard as item that will not lose their valu telescamm exploit thi
mindset by offer highqual gem for wholesal price custom ar told thei ar
be offer a special deal due to fluctuat in the market or becaus their name ar on
an industri list
the risk is minim victim ar told by acquir the stone wholesal the individu
minim the invest exposur the compani even offer it own brokerag servic
which can liquid the stone at a moment notic should the investor need the cash back
quickli the stone not onli have a grade certif and apprais document but ar also
consum fraud financi transact
11724 2011 fraud examin manual
seal in a plastic wrapper to guarante that their condit remain flawless the real
purpos of the seal which victim ar told must not be broken if the gem ar ever to be
offer for sale is to keep buyer from make a genuin inspect of the articl
onc a victim make a bui a compani spokesperson call a second time sai that if the
person bui more stone hi gemston portfo lio will be more attract to prospect
buyer and at auction advertis in compani literatur if the victim bui addit item a
compani broker will inevit call with good new the brokerag will have found a
buyer for the victim hold but befor the transact can go through the custom
must pai some minor fee these mai be pass off as finder fee broker
commiss examin fee intern duti or tax there mai be a provis
requir the victim to bui more stone befor make the sale
a variat on the scheme target those who have alreadi bought gem from telemarket
and whose name ar taken from insid list the caller claim to be a broker repres
an oversea buyer readi to purchas the listen portfolio but invari the buyer must
have a few more stone in the portfoliowhich the caller offer to supplyin order to
make the sale and there ar fee and commiss to be paid
preciou metal
the preciou metal market ha tradition been on of wide varianc price fluctuat
constantli and even expert have troubl decid what the next trend will be telemarket
oper plai on thi instabl with offer of gold silver and platinum onc again
victim ar told price will never be thi good again and that if thei hesit thei will miss a
singular opportun to make a fortun
900 numbers800 numbersintern call
900 number ar usual associ with psychic hotlin phone sex line and other dubiou
enterpris us 900 number custom can dial a prayer or even listen to the easter
bunni some caller insist thei did not know thei were be charg for the servic by
us a tollfre 800 number that then link the caller to the perminut charg promot
ar abl to surreptiti begin charg custom for call 800 number ar often us as
a front in telemarket oper to lead consum to think that a call is free when in fact
there ar hidden charg everywher a particularli viciou combin us a tollfre
number to make a present about commun servic onc the caller dial in the
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11725
computer servic automat put a monthli charg sometim label voicemail
on the caller phone bill
mani oper familiar to law enforc as tradit boiler room move into the toll
number when thei becam wide avail in the 1980 victim dial in think thei will
receiv inform on claim fund from abandon bank account or inherit from
long lost rel credit repair offer and advancefe loan servic us 900 number
extens sweepstak and prize giveawai ar promot thi wai as ar employ
servic real estat educ inform on govern program and auction and biz
op of everi kind the latest ruse us a 900 number to convinc peopl to invest in the 900
number busi
intern call
an offshor version of the 900 number scam us intern phone compani to reap
big dollar caller believ thei ar dial an intern number for free inform
usual about travel contest discount fare or oversea job but the phone number in
guyana and the caribbean charg up to 230 per minut for a record messag that run
for 15 minut the promot get a kickback from the phone compani in on case 37
cent per minut went to the scammer
sell free inform
compani involv in thi kind of scheme take out ad in newspap and magazin or
bui spot on talk radio promis thei can locat govern job get deal on liquid
equip or find student loan all thi inform is avail cheapli or free to the
public through govern offic on the internet and from other sourc on need onli
know where to look
scholarship servic
mayb the most wide broadcast offer in the info racket is the colleg scholarship locat
servic student aid inc a new york citi firm provid an exampl sai guarante
student and their parent that for a 97 fee thei would receiv at least 1000 in
scholarship or grant in realiti govern prosecutor show the defend almost
never obtain scholarship monei for consum sai us a common claus in it
contract to keep from pai refund requir student to produc letter of reject
from everi scholarship on their search list even though the list includ scholarship whose
deadlin had pass or for which the student did not qualifi
consum fraud financi transact
11726 2011 fraud examin manual
whatev inform scholarship servic do provid is avail for littl or noth at
most a 5 or 10 fee from legitim institut the perpetr impli that thei have
insid connect or that thei actual administ the dispers of moni when in realiti
thei mere provid list of scholarship offer by foundat and univers
in most case inform scam sell freeli avail materi there is also a version that
doe offer the inform for free but stick a charg on anywai the intern call
scam promis free inform on travel contest and discount fare the inform
itself doe not cost anyth but the call to get it cost from 3 to 6 a minut for a 15
minut call
chariti front
an increas number of group call themselv nonprofit charit concern ar not
what thei appear veri littl or no monei goe to the advertis caus polic and firemen
associ have in some case lent their name to telemarket fund drive that onli give
about 35 percent of their collect to the group some boiler room oper claim to call
for these groupsor for drive against a dise as or underprivileg childrenwhen thei ar
in no wai affili with the chariti
a twist to thi scam is the imperson of handicap worker by boiler room oper
phone pro call victim claim to be handicap or disabl and attempt to sell light
bulb and other household product the merchandis is price at three time it actual
valu the monei is of cours pocket by the oper
doortodoor promot
sweepstak promot us a chariti front offer the possibl of new car and cash prize
to contributor the raffl approach ty the number of chanc to a set amount
help drive up how much the victim is will to give a favor devic of phoni chariti is
to send schoolag children doortodoor sai thei ar rais monei for antidrug
program or for a group that take underprivileg kid on trip some of the children repeat
what thei ar told in exchang for a few dollar other believ thei will receiv reward and
free trip when in fact thei too ar be scam
prize sweepstak discount servic
the most common giveawai is known as the 1in5 a postcard arriv in the mail tell
the receiv thei have alreadi won a prize a new luxuri vehicl top the list along with
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11727
5000 in cash a diamond necklac a live room set and 500 in gift certif for
cloth and household furnish the odd of win ani of the prize ar astronom
victim ar given trinket or coupon redeem onli for the compani own
shoddi merchandis
winner who call back ar often ask to stipul how thei intend to spend their win
for the compani record or for public materi then thei will be ask to pai a
process fee or to prepai the tax on their win sometim winner pai immedi
by dial a 900 number that charg them for a 10minut call even if thei hang up
immedi thi practic is a further violat of telemarket law which requir a toll
number to disconnect within 30 second after the caller hang up
magazin subscript
a product front for prize hawker is the magazin subscript servic prepaid
subscript offer extract monei from custom through credit card and bank debit
then never deliv the public in other instanc the process fee far exce the
actual valu of the subscript
offic and household suppli
a scam that ha recent becom preval involv copi machin toner an invoic for
toner is sent to a compani the con have usual call beforehand gotten the name of the
employe in charg of suppli and address the invoic to that person although the
offic never order or receiv ani toner the con men ar reli on poor commun
to cover their ruse the invoic will most like be sent to the account depart and
paid if the proper control ar in place at everi level of busi oper thi scheme
should be detect too mani busi howev ar vulner to thi kind of scam
the caller mai get the compani repres to accept a trial or promot ship of
the product he mai claim to be a supplier for the compani or a new salesman from a
regular supplier the product arriv and an invoic follow a coupl of week later if the
compani tri to send the product back it is return to them to avoid further
complic the compani will normal pai the bill just to put an end to the situat
ani sort of offic suppli from paper to shelv to clean product can be part of a
scam medic suppli ship to doctor offic and clinic ar push in a similar fashion
individu household can be the target of these ploi as well water purifi ar often us
consum fraud financi transact
11728 2011 fraud examin manual
in tandem with giveawai offer the victim bui a filter devic at an inflat cost in order
to qualifi for the giveawai pyramidstyl oper often us household product and
healthrel merchandis such as vitamin or skin cream as part of their machin
phish
phish is a popular scheme that involv trick busi or individu into provid
password account number or other sensit data by claim to be from an actual
compani the victim doe busi with a solicit for inform appear to come from
a legitim busi and can occur over the phone such as a call from the victim bank
sai their account ha been compromis and request pin number account number
or password or via email which is the most common techniqu an individu receiv
an email that appear to come from ebai paypal or a financi institut the email state
that the custom must immedi log into hi account in order to updat hi inform
the link direct the individu to a fake site that captur hi identifi inform such as
social secur number and pin mother maiden name and financi account number
it is crucial for peopl to recogn phish so that thei dont fall victim to it
phish occur mostli by email as describ abov the sender of the email pretend
to be a legitim bank govern agenc or retail and ask the recipi to confirm
hi person inform for ani of these or other madeup reason the person
account will be close if thei dont give the inform an order ha been place in
their name or their inform ha been lost becaus of a comput glitch dont ever
respond to these email legitim bank govern agenc and retail would not
email you for your password of other identifi inform
do not click on ani link in an email that ask for your person inform the link
includ in the email sent by phisher will take you to a phoni websit that look just
like the websit of the real compani or agenc if you follow the instruct you
would enter your person inform which would go straight into the hand of
ident thiev
iron phisher mai even sai that thei ar from the fraud depart of popular
compani and ask you to verifi your inform becaus thei suspect you mai be a
victim of ident theft other tactic includ the phisher claim to be from a state
lotteri commiss who request peopl bank inform to deposit their
win in their account again never disclos ani person inform via email
phish can also happen by phone verifi caller ident and contact their compani
for legitimaci instead of fraudster send spam thei might call you and pretend to be
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11729
from a compani or govern agenc make the same kind of fals claim and
ask for your person inform if someon contact you and sai that you have
been a victim of fraud verifi the person ident befor you provid ani person
inform legitim credit card issuer and other compani mai contact you if there
is an unusu pattern indic that someon els might be us on of your account
howev thei onli ask if you made particular transact thei dont request your
account number or other person inform law enforc agenc might also
contact you if youv been the victim of fraud to be on the safe side ask for the
person name the name of the agenc or compani the telephon number and the
address then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitim
phisher also target peopl who list themselv on job search site thei pretend to be
potenti employ and ask for your social secur number and other person
inform befor give anyon your person inform follow the abov advic
and make sure to verifi the person ident
be suspici if contact unexpectedli and ask for your person inform it is
difficult to determin a compani legitimaci by read an email go to a websit or
talk to someon on the phone if your contact unexpectedli and ask to give out
your person inform a red flag should go up that someth is phishi
legitim compani and agenc do not oper thi wai
act immedi if youv been hook by a phisher if you provid account number
pin or password to a phisher notifi the compani with whom you have the
account right awai for inform about how to put a fraud alert on your file at
the credit report bureau and other advic for id theft victim contact the feder
trade commiss id theft clearinghous wwwconsumergovidtheft or tollfre
8774384338
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag via
sm the protocol us to us transmit text mess ag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
consum fraud financi transact
11730 2011 fraud examin manual
voic phish or vish
vish is a form of phish attack where email for on reason or anoth direct
recipi to dial a 1800 number where an autom record request that caller enter
person inform us a touchton phone
pharm
pharm is an attack in which a user is fool into enter sensit data such as a
password or credit card number into a malici websit that imperson a legitim
websit it is differ from phish in that the attack doe not have to reli on have the
user click on a link in the email to direct him to the fake websit pharm actual exploit
a vulner in the dn server softwar that allow a hacker to acquir the domain name
for a site and redirect the websit traffic from a legitim site to a fals on so even though
the user type in the correct websit address the pharm program send the user to an
illegitim site that look like the real thing unknowingli the user is then provid
password and inform directli to the hacker
recoveri room
recoveri room oper target those who have alreadi lost monei to a telemarket
scam pose as a consum advocaci group or a law firm telemarket offer victim a
chanc to recov ani fund thei mai have lost and bring the perpetr to justic onc
the victim agre legal investig and other fee will begin to emerg
ponzi and pyramid scheme
definit
a ponzi scheme is gener defin as an illeg busi practic in which new investor
monei is us to make payment to earlier investor a simpl invest scam rake in as
much monei as possibl and then disappear a ponzi stai in busi by turn some of
the monei back into the game a few conspicu reward earli on will whip up interest the
busi will grow and then if theyr smart and lucki the oper will split
everyon involv pretend to mount a legitim organ but littl or no commerci
activ take place payoff ar made from the pool of investor fund the rest is siphon
into oper pocket scheme mai run for at least a year some ponzi have flourish
for a decad or more
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11731
in account term monei paid to ponzi investor describ as incom is actual
distribut of capit it like give awai the store instead of share profit your share
cash reserv
approach thi crime analyt we can see into the mechan of the fraud illeg cash is
hidden in secur or other financi instrument promot us phoni account phoni
book and phoni name success prosecut have to uncov these guis and track the
fund plu the inner work of a ponzi oper have to be summar for a juri
whose member ar probabl not mathematician or account
madoff and stanford ponzi rise again
in earli 2009 ponzi scheme becam headlin new when bernard berni madoff plead
guilti to a 50 billion ponzi scheme the largest in us histori and r allen stanford wa
charg with run an 8 billion dollar ponzi
bernard berni madoff
introduct
on decemb 11 2008 feder bureau of investig agent arrest bernard
berni madoff a 70yearold businessman and former chairman of the nasdaq
stock market and charg him on a singl count of secur fraud accord to the
charg document the arrest came after madoff told two senior employe later identifi
as hi son that hi invest advisori busi wa basic a giant ponzi scheme
estim that investor lost approxim 50 billion in hi fraud feder prosecutor
howev put the amount at 648 billion
background
befor hi arrest madoff enjoi a sterl reput recogn as a financi
mastermind in 1960 madoff found hi invest compani bernard l madoff
invest secur llc with 5000 he earn from hi job as a lifeguard and a
sprinkler instal the busi eventu becam on of the five brokerdeal that
help creat the nasdaq stock exchang which madoff later chair and establish
itself as on of the top market maker busi on wall street the sixth largest in 2008
madoff wa also a wide respect philanthropist devot hi time and wealth to
numer charit caus he not onli establish hi own multimilliondollar privat
consum fraud financi transact
11732 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat that donat monei to educ cultur and health chariti he also serv
on the board of sever nonprofit institut
madoff invest scheme
even though it is not clear when madoff invest fraud began feder investig
believ the fraud mai have begun in the 1970 while madoff himself state that it began in
the 1990 it is clear that madoff unusu consist return show annual
return from eight to twelv percent were not the result of hi invest strategi
befor hi confess madoff claim that he gener the steadi return by emploi a
splitstrik convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that
involv a combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to
gener predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close
correl to an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put
option on the same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who request
withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund from
new invest to pai them off
how madoff made it happen
unlik most ponzi scheme which collaps in a few year as withdraw exce deposit
madoff con last longer spread farther and caus more loss than ani similar scheme
in histori understand the madoff case rais the question how did madoff fool so
mani peopl for so long of cours there is no singl answer to explain the success of
madoff scheme but there ar sever factor that contribut to it unusu prosper
includ hi abil to attract new investor maintain stabil and avoid detect these
ar explor in the follow section
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11733
attract new investor
madoff abil to attract new investor is on reason for hi scheme success for year
madoff scheme did not collaps becaus he successfulli rais enough monei from new
investor to keep pai return sever factor contribut to madoff s abil to entic
new investor most significantli report of solid longterm and lowrisk return
regardless of the market environ lure new investor through a fals sens of secur
unlik most ponzi scheme madoff did not promis extraordinari return instead he
promis stabil and longterm profit in other word madoff attract new investor by
avoid the appear of risk
similarli hi reput and profession statur provid comfort to hi investor as a
major figur in nasdaq a pioneer market maker and a govern advisor on
market issu madoff rsum wa except madoff also enjoi a longstand
reput as a modest and humbl individu a man who put hi famili first and donat
much of hi time and monei to sever charit caus
moreov madoff lure new investor by promot secreci and exploit the complex
inher to the industri madoff emphas secreci by keep hi investor and invest
strategi from the gener public which creat a sens of exclus and an enigmat
entic in hi invest account addition madoff understood that the complex
and cryptic natur of the secur industri caus investor to feel that it is a disciplin for
peopl who ar much smarter and he exploit thi by market hi splitstrik convers
invest method as too complic for outsid to understand these characterist
allow madoff to shift investor fear from the risk of lose monei to the risk that thei
might miss out on make monei creat an environ ripe for fraudul practic
maintain stabil
in addit to attract new investor some expert suggest that madoff successfulli
avoid larg unexpect withdraw that would lead to the collaps of hi scheme by
target wealthi individu and chariti sinc the wealthi feel ani econom downturn
last and least such investor provid madoff with the monei he need to keep hi scheme
go similarli professor mitchel zuckoff author of ponzi scheme the true stori of
a financi legend argu that by target chariti madoff could avoid the threat of
sudden or unexpect withdraw zuckoff sai that charit foundat ar legal
requir to spend onli five percent of their fund each year and that thi low rate of
withdraw allow madoff scheme to avoid detect as long as he attract new
investor
consum fraud financi transact
11734 2011 fraud examin manual
a void detect
despit multipl sec investig and alleg of fraud begin as earli as 1999
madoff invest scheme continu without detect there ar sever reason for thi
in particular he construct hi invest busi to avoid most regulatori oversight and
other check and balanc although privat invest pool such as hedg fund ar
subject to limit oversight madoff firm wa a differ kind of entiti unlik privat
invest pool which us an outsid brokerag firm to execut their trade madoff firm
wa a brokerdeal with an assetmanag divis allow the firm to process all of
it own trade similarli while most privat invest pool typic keep their client
fund or secur with an extern custodian madoff firm kept it fund inhous
essenti these practic help keep hi activ hidden from view
madoff also avoid the oblig to us a pcaobregist auditor by structur hi
firm as a privat held brokerdeal thi allow hi firm to us an unknown audit
firm with onli three employe on of whom wa a 78yearold live in florida and no
other larg wall street client
equal import is that madoff avoid file requir disclosur of hi firm hold
with the sec madoff did thi by sai that hi firm sold all of it hold for cash at
the end of everi report period
in addit to oper hi busi on the outskirt of regul madoff avoid
detect by discourag the us of prudent investor tool like due dilig audit
statement and understand of invest strategi notabl evid show that madoff
kick some investor out of hi fund for ask too mani question likewis madoff
reportedli shun question from invest media about hi strategi and as note
abov madoff conduct hi invest busi with great secreci and even refus to
provid client with onlin access to their account
red flag
with the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flag in madoff invest advisori
busi and if noth els the madoff saga can provid some simpl lesson to help
identifi and prevent similar ponzi scheme the most appar red flag ar discuss
below
steadi return
the most obviou red flag wa that madoff firm gener consist steadi posit
return dure hi seventeenyear track record with no down year and veri few neg
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11735
month regardless of market condit and even though madoff attribut thi to hi
splitstrik convers invest strategi a techniqu that can gener profit over mani
year thi type of strategi will gener some down month and exhibit more volatil than
madoff report return in other word madoff profit were too good to be true
extrem secreci and lack of transpar
madoff secreci and lack of transpar in the oper of hi busi and invest
process provid yet anoth red flag as disc uss abov report indic that madoff wa
extrem secret regard hi invest strategi specif madoff never clearli
defin hi splitstrik convers strategi which other trader could not duplic and he
refus to answer question ab out hi invest strategi in addit madoff did not
provid hi client with a high level of detail in their monthli statement and refus to
provid onlin access to their account
madoff also kept inform from other employe at hi firm accord to a senior
employe madoff kept the financi statement for the firm under lock and kei and wa
cryptic about hi invest advisori busin ess which he oper from a separ floor
when discuss it with other employe
lack of job segreg
the lack of job segreg wa anoth red flag that should have rais concern about
madoff oper unlik typic hedg fund that us a network of thirdparti servic
provid to perform certain function madoff firm perform these oper intern
and with no thirdparti oversight a hedg fund network of thirdparti servic provid
typic includ an invest manag to manag the asset a broker or broker to
manag the trade a fund administr and a custodianprim broker these third
parti provid essenti check and balanc necessari to protect individu and
institut madoff firm on the other hand perform these function intern madoff
not onli trade hi manag account inhous by oper as a brokerdeal he also
maintain custodi of hi client asset indic that there wa no independ custodian
to verifi the exist of asset
small account firm
on of the most signific red flag wa the firm unknown auditor friehl
horowitz a firm that emploi onli three peopl clearli it seem inconceiv that a
threeperson oper could adequ audit a firm of madoff size and complex
furthermor the account firm had onli on activ account david friehl who
had not regist with the pcaob an independ agenc that wa creat under the
consum fraud financi transact
11736 2011 fraud examin manual
sarbanesoxlei act to help detect fraud similarli the firm wa not peer review a
process in which audit organ assess each other for intern qualiti control
accord to the aicpa the account firm wa not requir to particip in ani peer
review becaus friehl inform the group that the firm had not conduct audit for 15
year
on march 18 2009 friehl becam the second person charg in the fraud scandal
accord to feder prosecutor friehl wa charg with secur fraud aid and
abet investmentadvisor fraud and for file fals audit report to the sec
unusu fee structur
the structur of the firm compens also rais red flag unlik most hedg fund
which charg manag and perform fee madoff firm earn commiss on each
trade thi unusu fee structur rais mani question why would the firm not act like a
hedg fund and profit from big gain why would it let thirdparti distributor get these
fee
tip from more than on sourc
final outsid analyst rais critic question about madoff firm for year for
exampl in 2001 an articl that appear on the marhedg websit titl madoff
top chart skeptic ask how serious question madoff abil to deliv
incred consist return a subsequ barron articl titl dont ask dont
tell rais the same concern note that some on wall street remain skeptic about
how madoff achiev such stun doubledigit return
still the most notabl critiqu came from independ fraud investig harri
markopolo cfe cfa in 1999 markopolo start a campaign to persuad the
sec that madoff return could not be legal gener us the invest strategi
that he claim to us despit receiv littl attent markopolo continu to send
sec offici inform about madoff and in 2005 markopolo present the sec
with a 17page memo titl the world largest hedg fund is a fraud in the memo
markopolo outlin 29 red flag in madoff busi deal and argu that madoff
wa either frontrun client order or oper the world largest ponzi scheme thi
time the sec respond to markopoloss tip and initi an investig
unfortun the investig did not uncov ani evid of a ponzi scheme
final sever financi institut includ goldman sach group inc and credit
suiss group ag either refus to do busi with madoff or advis their custom
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11737
against it in fact goldman sach blacklist madoff firm after it fail to pass their
standard of due dilig
conclus
in 2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud
on count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he
wa sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion
dollar the amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi given the size scope and
complex involv in the fraud the process of unravel madoff web of financi
deal could take year and the full extent of the damag caus by hi scheme mai never
be known
secur and exchang commiss v stanford intern bank et al
r allen stanford a promin financi philanthropist and sponsor of sport team had
been on the radar of regul for year thank to the oddli stabl and gener return
offer by hi firm certif of deposit but recent the secur and exchang
commiss sec perhap inspir by madoff alleg 50 billion ponzi scheme took
a renew interest in stanford and hi oper on februari 27 2009 the sec file
a complaint alleg that stanford three of hi compani and two of hi execut carri
out a massiv ponzi scheme for at least a decad involv billion of dollar of investor
fund
the parti
plaintiff
secur and exchang commiss sec
defend
stanford intern bank ltd sib
stanford group compani sgcinvest advis to sib
stanford capit manag llc scginvest advis to sib
r allen stanford stanfordchairman chief execut offic and sole sharehold of
the stanford oper
jame m davi davisdirector and chief financi offic of sfg and sib
laura pendergestholt pendergestholtc hief invest offic of sfg and a
member of sib invest committe
consum fraud financi transact
11738 2011 fraud examin manual
relief defend
stanford financi group sfg
the stanford financi gr oup bldg inc sfgb
the alleg
the secur and exchang commiss file a number of alleg against the
defend in it first amend complaint file on februari 27 2009 with the us
district court for the northern district of texa dalla divis these alleg
includ
stanford and davi misappropri billion of dollar of investor fund and
falsifi sib financi statement in an effort to conceal their ponzi scheme
pendergestholt facilit the scheme by misrepres to investor that she
manag sib multibillion invest portfolio of asset and emploi a sizabl
team of analyst to monitor the portfolio
sib sold approxim 8 billion of certif of deposit cd through
deceiv investor about the secur of the cd and the asset in which the bank
wa invest
stanford and davi invest an undetermin amount of investor fund in
specul unprofit privat busi control by stanford
stanford and davi fabric the perform of sib invest portfolio in
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor fund flow in the fabric
financi inform in no wai reveal the true perform of the bank
invest portfolio
sgc and scm advis us materi fals and mislead histor
perform data to sell more than 1 billion of a proprietari mutual fund wrap
program gener fee for sgc and scm in excess of 25 million
the defend violat or aid and abet violat of the secur act of
1933 the secur exchang act of 1934 the invest advisor act of
1940 and the invest compani act of 1940
the red flag
despit be such an opaqu oper oper in a minim regul jurisdict
and offer suspici stabl return on it invest sib did an excel job of
attract investor and field regul for quit some time and whether or not
stanford is guilti of run the alleg 8 billion ponzi scheme remain to be seen but
regardless of the outcom of the case on cannot deni the exist of a number of warn
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11739
sign indic of a ponzi scheme or other invest fraud the red flag discuss below
should have had investor and regul intrigu if not downright apprehens
impress yet oddli stabl return
sib purport to achiev doubledigit return on it invest for the past 15 year not
onli were the return oddli stabl but thei were quit impress especi for such a
liquid invest often more than doubl the return offer by big bank for exampl
the interest rate offer by sib in februari 2009 on a oneyear cd requir a 50000
minimum invest in the unit state wa approxim 45 accord to the
bank websit while bankratecom report the averag interest rate offer by us
bank to be about 2 even more interest is that despit massiv loss in the stock
market and hedg fund in 2008 sib claim to experi a loss of onli 13 for that
period and continu to pai out aboveaverag return
opaqu invest strategi
there wa a stun lack of transpar into the invest strategi us by sib the
bank claim to gener it impress return by invest the cd monei larg in
corpor stock real estat hedg fund and preciou metal but offer few specif even
in it annual report sib strategi is a bit unusu as most issuer of cd invest cd
monei in higheryield us treasuri bond or similarli conserv instrument
market materi claim that the bank wa abl to offer substanti higher return as
a result of invest in a welldiversifi portfolio of highli market secur issu by
stabl govern strong multin compani and major intern bank and
also as a result of antigua low tax and moder overhead cost
incred small audit firm
the 14person antiguabas account firm ca hewlett co seem grossli
inadequ to audit the book of a bank that claim to manag and advis 50 billion in
investor fund but that who stanford reli upon for hi audit need
inbr govern structur
the independ and object of the bank board of director were question given
that the sevenmemb board wa domin by stanford insid famili and friend
veri high level of spend
although sell cd is typic a lowmargin busi stanford wa abl to offer much
higher than averag compens to broker includ larg bonus luxuri car and
expens vacat stanford empir wa also known to spend vast sum of monei on it
consum fraud financi transact
11740 2011 fraud examin manual
mani offic addition stanford compani were a big corpor sponsor of
profession sport team and charit caus and thei contribut heavili to polit
campaign
unusu background of chief invest offic
the qualif of pendergestholt the chief invest offic of sfg and a member of
sib invest committe ar insuffici to explain her meteor rise to the top of
stanford empir she did not have a busi school degre nor did she have ani
experi as an analyst at a wall street firm or larg mutual fund compani all of her
train wa receiv on the job while work for stanford
concern voic by a number of former brokersemploye
over the year there have been a number of grievanc includ lawsuit and public
arbitr case air against sfg and sib by former employe and broker includ
claim that the firm were run a ponzi or pyramid scheme claim that
employeesbrok were dismiss for object to and rais concern about the legal of
the firm practic claim that the firm us investor monei to financ it brokerag arm
and claim that the firm misl investor by offer artifici high yield on their cd
revoc of bank licens in montserrat
prior to stanford intern bank stanford oper guardian intern bank
which also issu question cd in the british territori of montserrat in the
caribbean but in 1991 after the local govern move to revok guardian bank
licens under hazi circumst stanford reloc to antigua and renam hi bank
stanford intern bank
at the time of thi write the onli charg against stanford and davi were civil fraud
charg pendergestholt howev had been arrest by feder prosecutor and charg
with crimin obstruct of justic to which she plead innoc for give mislead
statement to sec investig perhap prosecutor hope to secur a quick guilti plea
from her so that with a plea deal in hand thei can us her as a wit against stanford
and davi regardless of the outcom of the case investor should be wari ani time thei
come across a yield far higher than averag with no clear plausibl and legal explan
illeg pyramid or ponzi scheme
what the differ between an illeg pyramid scheme and a ponzi scheme thei both
us new investor monei to make payoff but theyr run veri differ by their
promot and legal theyr prosecut under differ law
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11741
first well distinguish between legal and illeg pyramid scheme then well show how a
ponzi scheme and an illeg pyramid ar the same thing onli differ
pyramid scheme legal and illeg
illeg pyramid gener revenu by continu recruit new member these oper
mai offer merchandis or servic for sale but the onli signific revenu come from
recruit
some legitim merchandis compani us a pyramid structur to rank their employeeown
and to determin those peopl compens but a pyramid structur becom a
pyramid scheme when the compani make it monei by recruit peopl instead of sell
a product or servic the group deal primarili in new membership join the group allow
the new member to profit by sign up new member the process continu until the
avail pool of new member is drain which happen sooner than on might think
usual there a product or a caus that front the illeg pyramid scheme as a legitim
enterpris promot shill beeswax supplement or claim theyr work to prevent youth
crime a favorit product front offer cours in area like investor educ or self
esteem these materi usual convei veri littl pertin inform in fact theyr
noth more than motiv tract design to make the victim a more enthusiast
particip in the pyramid
in ani case regardless of the product front an illeg pyramid emphas recruit first and
foremost the product or servic take a back seat to get new sucker sign up
as a rule of thumb most court appli the 70 percent rule thi requir that at least 70
percent of distributor profit come from retail sale of cours thi figur can be hard to
verifi distributor routin sign falsifi complianc statement becaus if thei dont
promot warn the author will shut the whole thing down and everyon lose
in the final assess legal rest on what the oper emphas if the compani
emphas the recruit of new member over the sale of product and if the onli wai
to recogn promis rich is through recruit then the oper will like be
classifi as an illeg pyramid
consum fraud financi transact
11742 2011 fraud examin manual
what the differ between an illeg pyramid and a ponzi scheme
illeg pyramid ar promot as pyramid ponzi scheme ar promot as invest
opportun
the kei element in a ponzi scheme is that initi investor ar paid with subsequ
investor monei there is litl or no legitim commerc
the same thing occur in an illeg pyramid nobodi sell the beeswax supplement
theyr all coax new peopl to put up monei the origin member of the pyramid get
rich on subsequ investor monei so a pyramid is a ponzi scheme
how about the obvers is a ponzi scheme a pyramid the distinguish factor of the
illeg pyramid is the continu need for new investor each new member recruit two
member who each recruit two and so forth
ponzi scheme like pyramid requir a steadi march of new investor fund to pai
dividend thi evergrow pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graph so in the
sens that it requir exponenti growth to avoid collaps a ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme
the differ between a ponzi and a pyramid li in how the oper is promot
illeg pyramid announc themselv as pyramid thei hype level or stage in their literatur
the pyramid structur help draw new player each believ that thei will rise through
the rank of the pyramid to becom golden or fulli vestedwhatev hokei titl the
scammer have concoct
a ponzi scheme on the other hand masquerad as some type of invest in financi
instrument miner right or some other form of specul the particip believ
theyr bui mortgageback secur or partial interest in an oil well thei have no idea
theyr funnel monei into a bottomless pit certainli no on suggest move on to the
next level of the pyramid becaus the pyramid isnt part of the pitch
when an enterprisenuskin intern for exampl promot itself as an
organ with level or stage and the onli wai to rise through the level is to recruit
new member the promot ar run an illeg pyramid scheme befor tim and
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11743
melinda rommel su nuskin thei were true believ sprinkl nuskin product across
their bathroom and kitchen serv splash nuskin answer to tang for breakfast everi
dai and even redecor their hous at the behest of nuskin consult all for the
purpos of snare new recruit the rommel su becaus thei were misl about their
opportun insid the organ thei knew all along thei were join a pyramid thei
just thought it wa a legal on
when an enterpris promot an invest opportun that invest littl or none of the
particip monei and that us new invest dollar to make dividend payment the
promot ar run a ponzi scheme
distinguish between ponzi and pyramid seem a bit academ but the differ
becom signific when perpetr ar brought to justic to prosecut an illeg pyramid
the enforc team need to show that the offend gener revenu mainli through
recruitmentth compani pyramid structur is an element of the charg pyramid
scheme ar sometim charg as illeg lotteri becaus prosecutor have successfulli
argu the particip ar total depend on the action of other for ani compens
in anoth prosecut strategi oper ar charg with fals repres potenti
earn sinc the mathemat limit of the pyramid make the promis 10000 a month
imposs or extrem against the odd again the pyramid structur itself is an issu in
the case
in summari
if oper make the bulk of particip earn depend on recruit and
emphas level and stage in their promot we call thi an illeg pyramid
if oper claim theyr offer an invest opportun but conduct littl or no
commerci activ we call thi a ponzi scheme
categori of ponzi scheme
ponzi scheme ar classifi accord to the front us in their promot the categori
ar pure cash which includ endless chain scheme and fillandsplit game and product front
which includ financi instrument mlm and specul
consum fraud financi transact
11744 2011 fraud examin manual
pure cash scheme
there ar two gener type of pure cash scheme endless chain and fillandsplit game
endless chain
the most outrag pyramid scam dont bother to hide their stripe thei dont us
servic or product to establish their legitimaci instead thei us the chain letter
approach the recipi of the letter send a sum of monei 5 50 100 the amount vari
but isnt usual veri larg to the person who mail them the letter then pass the letter
on to three or four other
probabl studi have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the player in a pyramid everyon
but those at the earliest initi will lose most of their monei fulli half can expect to lose
everyth thei put in
some internet chain have becom known as administ pyramid scheme everi
exchang in the chain is monitor by a central administr who make sure everybodi
plai and pai along the administr take a cut of each transact
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11745
fillandsplit game
the best wai to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with game element some kind
of hook to keep player attent focus on their rich and not how stupid their latest
opportun realli is these ar sometim call fillandsplit game a popular version
of thi approach ha been known as airplan each player bui a seat on a fictiti
airplan pai from 200 to 2000 a seat depend on the scale of the game initi
player help recruit new passeng and move up through the rank of crew copilot
and pilot when a flight is fulli book with someth like six passeng four crew
member a copilot and a pilot the plane take off the pilot and crew ar paid for the
flight and everybodi move up the rank just like a real airlin a plane investor ar
constantli look to fill their seat
anoth variat of the fillandsplit game tri to capit on the phenomen profit
yield over the last 15 year by the american stock market call financi network
market climb or anoth financialsound name these pure cash pyramid us a busi
metaphor in their pitch a typic oper spread 15 peopl over four level eight investor
bui into the network as vicepresid abov them ar four presid just below two
cochairman posit at the top sit pretti is the chairman everi time the eight slot
at the bottom ar fill averag price 1500 to 2000 the pyramid split the chairman get
out of the game with a golden parachut and everyon move up the corpor ladder
anxious scan for new recruit
these game ar usual predic on what becom known as affin fraud new player
ar recruit by their affin with exist particip peopl comb religi group or
commun associ for fresh lead affin mai be racial or cultur financi
network for exampl ha target a number of africanamerican commun
church synagogu and other religi organ offer fertil hunt ground and
great cover from promotersan endors from a clergyperson is as good as gold and
law enforc author ar often reluct to meddl in religi affair affin fraud
mai also prei on social group or profession organ
product front
the categori of product front is subdivid into financi instrument mlm and
specul
consum fraud financi transact
11746 2011 fraud examin manual
financi instrument
financi instrument such as stock borrow certif currenc exchang loan
scam and invest poolsar perfect tool for the ponzi artist charl ponzi victim
in 1920 thought thei were invest in postal repli coupon that ponzi assur everyon
yield whop profit by plai off the exchang rate of intern currenc in our
own time as legal tender in mexico brazil and asia rollercoast from on extrem to the
next the currenc exchang still make an ideal ponzi front
a stock market that gain 25 to 30 percent a year and individu stock quadrupl
sometim in a matter of month encourag the impress that all anyon ha to do is put
down their monei and wait by the mailbox unscrupul promot like to tout new item
like internet stock and biotechnolog startup but ani product will do even in thi wire
ag commod futuresfrom soybean to pork belliesar still number among the
most common bait for ponzi scheme
financi instrument ar especi effect front becaus most peopl dont understand
how legitim financi oper take place when wall street is set aflutt by
deriv of futur contract and hedg fund ar bet that the market will rise at the
same time theyr bet it will fall how is an averag investor with 20000 suppos to
understand hi option
multilevel market
when most peopl hear about a pyramid scheme thei think multilevel market or mlm
as it often abbrevi these organ hawk nutrit supplement household good
cosmet televis antenna insur long distanc phone servic everyth from
antiqu to zinc also among the offer might be copi of how to make a million dollar in
an mlm on of the industri monster monei maker is a string of train materi
design to pump the sale forc into ever higher feat of huckstership
math remain the great enemi as well as the prime tool of mlm promot scratch
matric never pyramid on a chalkboard and comput what 20 peopl mail monei to a
distributor hous everi month would amount to in a year time these shiller ignor
other aspect of the equat first the market for ani product outsid those own by larg
nation brand is extrem small cash in on a submarket requir an excess of savvi
financ and luck which most mlmer lack in spade then there pyramid
mathemat after a coupl of level you ru n out of peopl will to hear your spiel
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11747
which wa alreadi less than 5 percent of ani area popul in fact between 90 and 95
percent of mlm oper fail in their first two year compar to a 7080 percent failur
rate for small busi in gener
as a rule of thumb ani organ that recruit distributor into a pyramidstyl
compens plan offer big payoff for recruit sai more than 100 per recruit and
spend more time trumpet it distributor level than it product line is probabl illeg
specul
for the purpos of thi cours the term specul describ ani invest proposit not
cover as financi instrument or mlm thi includ franchis offer and busi
opportun in gener workathom promot and invest in area like real estat
or miner right these ar good oldfashion invest except when theyr ponzi
scheme
franchis scam hawk such opportun as pai phone busi or vend machin by
their natur such busi ar spread out geograph and dont involv much direct
contact with the promot and the franchis holder
workathom promot ar also favorit tool of the franchis scammer comput
technolog is a popular front sinc thousand of peopl realli ar set up busi from
their home a few earli dividend check per the ponzi playbook ar often enough to
overcom a client hesit and provok a more sizeabl invest then the promot
can fold up and move to anoth state or anoth coast
bigmonei specul often base their highflown claim in the ground beneath our feet
land and the miner drawn from it like gold coal and oil ha ancient been regard as
the ultim commod the ground is the fundament of everi human endeavor so perhap
the land swindl is also the fundament of fraud someon somewher it seem ha alwai
been sell flood lot to homestead salt gold mine with chunk of pyrit or
assur a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acr of desert he
just bought for a song
obvious a commerci environ that thrive on specul is ripe for ponzi fraud
rememb the ponzi element in a ponzi scheme is onli a techniqu give back a few
dollar to sweeten the pot anyth that can coax peopl to part with their monei from
consum fraud financi transact
11748 2011 fraud examin manual
emu farm to underwat land develop can be run as a ponzi all the name ponzi
realli mean is that a few mark get paid thi lend a competit element to an otherwis
runofthemil fraud instead of everyon lose some lucki player do make monei
specul fraud dont alwai start out as con but when their rollercoast dip mani
specul find it too tempt to hang on and ride thei figur thei can phoni their wai
through the crisi and pick up again later again it math that usual doom these player
thei simpli cant make monei fast enough to feed the deficit thei need a payoff so big
noth short of a miracl or more fraud will suffic
specul can quickli get caught in a chain reaction where each fraud demand more
fraud by the time these organ ar shut down theyr spend half of their resourc
or more just cover up their crimin act
spot pyramid scheme
almost everyon know what a pyramid scheme is peopl see them expos on televis
and read about them constantli in magazin and newspap so if everyon is so well
inform about the pyramid how doe it surviv
it could be that familiar ha lull the public into a fals sens of secur pyramid have
sever strong weapon at their dispos
thei do pai off unlik a simpl con game in which the fraudster throw the ruse grab
the cash and exit pyramid build up the take by pai initi investor thi make
for excel testimoni earli player circul the word and bring in new mark initi
payoff also keep earli player come back payoff make the enterpris look legitim
and fuel the expans process charl phillip elliot ran hi invest busi
pyramidstyl for 16 year take in more than 60 million from 1100 investor when
elliot wa bust a busi associ quip elliot paid like a slot machin he lull
everyon to sleep 2
thei oper mainli through preexist affili commun group religi
organ and social club all make entic target for pyramid ani pyramid
requir a healthi pool of particip so a larg group alreadi gather togeth is ideal
besid that pyramid know how to manipul the trust that peopl place in these
group
2 holzman todd busi datelin octob 1987 page 16ff
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11749
thei us ingenu and fals logic in their pitch the product front avail for
pyramid ar myriad from bath soap to electron front in financi instrument
and real estat ar especi effect becaus most peopl dont understand how those
busi work anywai pure cash game find clever metaphorslik a conceptu
airplan or a busi execut hierarchi to make themselv attract
pyramid of everi stripe us a seduct though fals logic in their pitch everybodi ha
friend and associ you onli have to sign up three or four peopl below you of cours
the law of mathemat spell doom to thi logic there simpli arent enough player to keep
even a small pyramid run three peopl each find three peopl will quickli plai out
their avail friend and associ if not mathemat then social there also a
reason limit on how quickli monei can grow
the pyramid then is built to overcom peopl most common misgiv about invest
promot offer far more than an undertak of great advantag nobodi to know what it
is thei ar veri specif in their prospectu the offer sound good and within it own
logic make sens the opportun is usual pitch by someon familiar to the victim
or at least by someon with an affin the victim trust most importantli the pyramid doe
return peopl monei with the incred profit attach as promis
speed is anoth potent weapon in the pyramid arsen con sai get in now or regret it
forev thei dont have time becaus of market demand or commit elsewher
for the person to check out the deal that becaus a moder amount of due dilig
research will expos the deal as a scheme
the final factor is greed a recent poll quot in charl whitlock easi monei reveal
that when peopl receiv telephon call from a bogu invest compani on in twenti
took the bait the victim had no prior contact with the salesperson or the compani but
still five percent of them bought but there wa a catch the poll also report that
consid all those stung by a telephon fraud onli two percent of those call
themselv trust and just two percent of those who call themselv openmind had
been the victim of fraud simpli put person with healthi live strong famili ti and an
honest work ethic ar not as like to get burn as peopl who ar lone desper and out
to make a quick buck of cours as our exampl have shown the rang of peopl caught in
pyramid scheme ha no bound plenti of victim ar experienc care profession
who have either let down their guard or becom ensnar by the cleverest of sham
consum fraud financi transact
11750 2011 fraud examin manual
franchis fraud
franchis is part of the american dream a gatewai to busi ownership for million of
american franchis is estim to account for more than 40 percent of all retail sale in
the unit state a percentag that is expect to reach 50 percent in a few short year
accord to a report issu by the hous committe on small busi but the dream of
busi ownership can be easili shatter by fraud
franchis regul
in 1978 the us feder trade commiss ftc enter the realm of franchis regul
by enact disclosur requir and prohibit concern franchis and
busi opportun venturesth ftc rule 16 cfr part 436 as state by the
ftc the rule is design to enabl potenti franchise to protect themselv befor
invest by provid them with inform essenti to an assess of the potenti
risk and benefit to meaning comparison with other invest and to further
investig of the franchis opportun as thi mission statement suggest the ftc rule
address the disclosur made by franchis to potenti franchise as oppos to ongo
issu in the relationship between franchis and franchise and other issu that aris in the
termin of franchis relationship
but the 1978 enact of the ftc rule did not lead to the erad of fraud claim in
franchis relationshipsamong the rule defici it doe not creat a privat civil
action mani state legislatur have enact law that supplement the ftc rule illinoi is a
good exampl of a progress state in franchise law the rule howev preempt ani
inconsist state disclosur law
the ftc franchis rule
the ftc franchis rule prohibit fraud in the initi sale of a franchis in which the
franchis affect interst commerc under the rule franchisor must furnish potenti
franchise with written disclosur provid import inform about the franchisor
the franchis busi and the franchis relationship and give them at least 10 busi
dai to review it befor invest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11751
franchisor mai make the requir disclosur by follow either the rule disclosur
format or the uniform franchis offer circular ufoc guidelin prepar by state
franchis law offici
the rule impos six differ requir in connect with the advertis offer
licens contract sale or other promot of a franchis in or affect commerc
the rule requir franchisor to give potenti investor a basic disclosur document at
the earlier of the first facetofac meet or 10 busi dai befor ani monei is paid
or an agreement is sign in connect with the invest
if a franchisor make earn claim whether histor or forecast thei must have a
reason basi and prescrib substanti disclosur must be given to a potenti
investor in write at the same time as the basic disclosur
the rule affect onli ad that includ an earn claim such ad must disclos the
number and percentag of exist franchise who have achiev the claim result
along with cautionari languag their us trigger requir complianc with the rule
earn claim disclosur requir
the franchisor must give investor a copi of it standardform franchis and relat
agreement at the same time as the basic disclosur and final copi intend to be
execut at least five busi dai befor sign
the rule requir franchisor to make refund of deposit and initi payment to
potenti investor subject to ani condit on refund state in the disclosur
document
while franchisor ar free to provid investor with ani promot or other materi thei
wish no written or oral claim mai contradict inform provid in the requir
disclosur document
the ftc alon ha jurisdict to enforc the rule howev ani misrepresent in a
ufoc certainli could be us to support claim for fraud under state statutori andor
common law the ftc rule preempt inconsist state law as a practic matter it creat
a minimum disclosur standard which mani state have equal or enhanc by statut
state law
more than half of the state have enact either gener franchis disclosur law or busi
opportun law or both approxim 15 state have enact franchis disclosur law
that creat a caus of action for failur to regist a franchis with the design state
consum fraud financi transact
11752 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc andor failur to provid the appropri disclosur to the prospect franchise in a
time manner those state includ california hawaii illinoi indiana maryland michigan
minnesota new york north dakota oregon rhode island south dakota virginia
washington and wisconsin these state law give franchis purchas import legal
right includ the right to bring privat lawsuit for violat of the state disclosur
requir the state statut provid damag or resciss as the remedi avail to
the success franchise
about 25 state have adopt law that regul the offer and sale of a busi opportun
and such legisl might be applic franchis agreement those state includ alaska
california connecticut florida georgia illinoi indiana iowa kentucki louisiana
main maryland michigan minnesota nebraska new hampshir north carolina ohio
oklahoma south carolina south dakota texa utah virgina and washington
other remedi
common law fraud
the failur of the ftc to outlaw fraud in franchis specif beyond the disclosur
phase doe not leav a defraud franchise without remedi common law fraud is
applic in gener a common law fraud action requir proof of a know or recklessli
fals represent or omiss of materi fact relianc and injuri
addition a contract mai be voidabl for fraud in the induc which occur when on
parti enter into a contract base on the other parti fraud for exampl if on parti
deliber misrepres materi fact to the other the contract will be unenforc at
the option of the aggriev parti but claim of fraud in the induc disclosur fraud
ar often defeat by carefulli draft languag in the franchis agreement
rico
the racket influenc and corrupt organ act rico 18 usc 1961 et seq
is the most power antifraud statut avail to civil litig becaus it provid for
automat trebl tripl of damag plu attornei fee and costsand rico is highli
relev to franchis there have been sever case where class action plaintiff have
establish rico claim base on the ongo systemwid fraud that had occur
concern the advertis fund
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11753
overview of franchis
under the ftc rule as well as the statutori andor common law of all or almost all of the
state there ar three prerequisit to appli the rule to a busi format or product
franchis trademark signific control or assist and requir payment
trademark
the franchis offer the right to distribut good or servic that bear the franchis
trademark servic mark trade name advertis or other commerci symbol
signific control or assist
the franchis exercis signific control over andor offer substanti assist to the
franchise in the oper of the franchis busi
requir payment
the franchise is requir to pai the franchis these payment usual includ initi
franchis fee and ongo royalti that ar calcul as a percentag of sale net of sale
tax anoth typic fee is a transfer fee that is applic on the sale of a franchis
fraud in franchis mai occur at each stage of the franchis relationship creat
disclosur relationship and termin issu
disclosur issu
disclosur issu aris when the franchis fail to commun materi inform or
disclos fals inform to induc the franchise to purchas a franchis that he would
not have otherwis purchas two prime exampl of potenti mislead inform
ar earn claim and success rate
earn claim
assum that a prospect franchise reli upon earn claim publish by the franchis as
a kei factor in hi decis to bui the franchis but those earn claim ar materi
mislead or even blatantli fals thi is a prime exampl of disclosur fraud in connect
with the franchis induc of potenti franchise to bui the franchis
disclosur fraud histor ha been the primari target of franchis regul the ftc
report that from 1989 to 1992 100 percent of it franchis enforc case were base
on alleg that the franchis had provid fraudul or mislead earn claim but
consum fraud financi transact
11754 2011 fraud examin manual
surprisingli the ftc doe not requir franchis to disclos earn the ftc rule
provid for the disclosur of earn claim regard actual or potenti sale incom
cost or profit of either exist or prospect franchise is option but if a franchis
elect to make earn claim it must have a reason basi for those claim
absent publish earn claim the prospect franchise is vulner to nonwritten
boast earn claim made by franchis salespeopl who make their live sell
franchis instead of sell the underli good or servic those nonwritten claim mai
turn out to be fals but the franchis mai try to protect itself by includ in the written
franchis agreement a no relianc or integr claus that state in effect
franchise acknowledg that thi agreement is the entir agreement of the parti and
that in enter into thi agreement he or she is not reli upon ani statement or
represent that mai have been made on or befor the date of thi agreement which ar
not expressli made a part of thi agreement
claus similar to thi on often have been us to defeat claim of fraud submit by
franchise who were induc to sign a contract base upon the franchis verbal
represent
success rate
anoth import disclosur issu is a franchis claim that x percent usual a high
percentag of it store have been success in other word thei have remain in
continu oper from open dai to the present but the franchis salesperson mai
not have told the franchise that a number of store were sold mani time and in each sale
the old franchise sold the store back to the franchis who resold it to a new franchise
would that addit inform be materi to the prospect franchise would failur
to disclos that inform amount to fraud
the ftc rule doe not requir franchis to disclos resal or turnov from on
franchise to the next
relationship issu
fraud in franchis is not limit to disclosur fraud onc the franchis relationship is
establish the franchis and franchise stand in a busi relationship that typic
involv the transact of fund at sever level under a seri of contract
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11755
the payment of royalti under the franchis or licens agreement for the right to us
the franchis trademark trade name and busi system
the payment of rent under a leas or subleas of real properti andor equip
contribut to an advertis fund
all of these financi transact mai be subject to claim for breach of contract fraud or
breach of a fiduciari duti of cours to determin the exact claim you must consult the
exact languag in the franchis agreement
numer issu also mai aris in the cours of the franchis relationship each of which
reflect an inher tension between the interest of franchis and franchise
train and support ha the franchis provid the level of train and technic
support that wa promis
control what degre of control is the franchis en titl to exercis over the franchise
product supplier and price to what extent mai the franchis deriv profit from
the franchise supplier relationship
new product to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to introduc new product
to keep ahead of the competit onc the decis to introduc new product is made
is the franchis held to ani standard of care to ensur that the product is success
expans or contract of the system doe the franchis natur desir to expand the
franchis system conflict with a franchise de sire to maxim profit at hi locat
convers what duti if ani doe a franchis ow to franchise in a particular
market if the franchis plan to withdraw from that market
encroach to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to refrain from open
new outlet too close to exist unit how close is too close if the licens
agreement is silent
expans by the franchise to what extent is an individu franchise desir to expand in
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole
reinvest mai a franchis requir a franchise to reinvest a portion of hi revenu
back into the busi doe it depend on whether the franchise own or leas the
real estat
termin issu
the end of a franchis relationship also mai provid ground for litig
renew doe a franchis have a duti to renew a franchise beyond the initi term of
hi licens agreement
consum fraud financi transact
11756 2011 fraud examin manual
earli termin under what circumst mai a franchis termin a franchis befor
the expir of hi contractu term
sale of a franchis under what circumst mai a franchis veto a franchise
propos sale of hi franchis to a thirdparti
posttermin restrict on competit to what extent mai the franchis restrict the
franchise right to compet after termin even if a franchise is allow to
compet after the franchis relationship is end the franchis mai sometim validli
demand that the franchise leav hi busi telephon number to the franchis as it
depart the system
ident theft
ident theft is an increasingli frequent type of fraud that is nondiscriminatori in natur
anyon can be target the victim might be a colleg student a retire a schoolteach or a
success attornei even corpor ar suscept to ident theft
2010 ident fraud survei report
accord to the 2010 ident fraud survei report conduct by javelin strategi research
the number of ident fraud victim in the us ha increas to 11 million from 10 million
report in the 2009 report although the total annual fraud amount increas by 125
percent over the previou year to 54 billion the report found that detect and resolut
effort ar work well
some of the kei find of the survei were
the mean consum cost of ident fraud decreas 25 percent from 496 per incid
in 2008 to 373 per incid in 2009 as a result of faster detect lower fraud amount
and quicker resolut time
social network fraud and potenti threat will like escal in the upcom year
on of the danger of social network site is the public displai of person
inform person page and account profil can expos sensit person
identifi inform and hint on how to easili find it crimin can harvest thi
inform to take over account or open fraudul account
contrari to prior year data onlin ident theft method constitut 42 percent of
fraud case in 2009 the other signific group of known case occur through
tradit method when a crimin can make direct contact with the consum
person inform the common method of access includ
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11757
obtain from a lost or stolen wallet checkbook credit card or other physic
document
access while conduct a purchas or transactionaccess by friend
acquaint rel or inhom employe
stolen from a compani that handl your financi data
stolen paper mail
although there is no univers definit of ident theft the depart of justic offer
the follow definit
ident theft and fraud ar crime in which someon wrongfulli obtain and us anoth
person person data in some wai that involv fraud or decept typic for econom
gain
person identif data includ name address social secur number date of birth
mother maiden name or other identifi inform the perpetr exploit thi
inform by open bank or credit card account take over exist account
obtain loan leas car or apart or appli for wireless telephon and util
servic in the victim name without hi knowledg
technolog advanc that facilit the electron transfer of person inform
and the transmiss of financi transact have greatli contribut to the recent increas
in occurr of ident theft as such technolog continu to develop thi type of fraud
will like remain a seriou problem that affect mani peopl
the profil
unlik some fraudster who steal as the result of a perceiv need most ident thiev
make a live steal ident for profit or at the veri least to supplement their incom
gener although it can be an employe friend or rel gener the fraudster usual
fall into on or more profil
been convict serv time in prison wish to conceal hi ident
been convict serv time in prison and look for a safer wai to commit a crime
and stai out of prison
colleg student look for an easi wai to work hi wai through school
landlord
rental car agent
consum fraud financi transact
11758 2011 fraud examin manual
illeg alien need an ident
illeg telemarket
common wai of obtain inform
while you might think that you ar care with your person inform in realiti a lot of
inform can be easili found and acquir by ident thiev without you even realiz
it an innoc inquiri for the most basic of inform such as verifi an address or
mother maiden name for a banker file can be the start of a financi nightmar the
most common wai inform is obtain ar
sort through discard trash
shoulder surf
rifl through cowork desk drawer
theft of mail incom or outgo
us an accomplic within the organ
solicit identifi through fals job applic scheme
telephon compani health club and school
certif and licens place on workplac wall
us pretext ruse or gag call
rental and loan applic
public record
the internet
sort through discard trash
most peopl do not destroi their person financi data thei simpli throw it awai with the
rest of their trash for pickup by the garbag collector on their regularli schedul dai
solicit for preapprov credit card ar some of the most valuabl piec of trash that
an ident thief can steal addition dumpster dive as it is more popularli known as
can yield check credit card and bank statement or other record that bear your name
address and telephon number in addit to target an individu trash dumpster
diver target the trash at bank insur compani hospit and other busi
locat that an individu ha no control over
shoulder surf
shoulder surf is anoth popular wai that the ident thief obtain inform the
person watch from a nearbi locat and listen to someon telephon convers or
watch the number be punch for a call card or credit card thu obtain enough
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11759
inform to us or procur a credit card ident thiev also watch potenti victim as
thei fill out bank deposit slip thu get account inform
rifl through cowork desk drawer
when peopl leav for break go to lunch or take vacat or sick leav mani if not most
do not lock up their desk or offic mani peopl also leav person item in their desk
drawer such as bank statement monthli credit card statement or mortgag coupon
book all of which have us inform for an ident thief
theft of mail incom or outgo
theft of mail in either direct provid us inform to the fraudster outgo
check left for the mail carrier to pick up provid bank account number and other
inform that can be us for illeg purpos
exampl
us just a driver licens number and bank account number a thief wa abl to
withdraw more than 30000 from a secur guard check account in thi case the
thief us the drivethrough at the secur guard bank to deposit a seri of stolen monei
order and simultan make larg withdraw
us an accomplic within the organ
sometim the ident thief is abl to compromis someon within an organ and
obtain enough inform where credit can be obtain it mai be a bank employe who
ha access to social secur number and bank balanc or an insur clerk who ha
access to person inform such as name address social secur number and medic
inform all us when assum someon ident
solicit identifi through fals job applic scheme
fill out a job applic might also be the sourc of inform to ident thiev
peopl believ that thei ar fill out a job applic when in realiti thei ar onli
suppli person inform to a thief
util compani health club and school
util compani health club and school all carri identifi that a fraudster can make us
of onc again the social secur number is us on mani applic and is a kei to
obtain other inform
consum fraud financi transact
11760 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a california woman us a stolen social secur number to obtain thousand of dollar
in credit and then file for bankruptci in the name of her victim she wa sentenc to 16
month in feder prison in addit to the prison term she wa order to pai restitut
in the amount of 13928 and pai a 5000 crimin fine
she admit that she assum the ident of anoth woman with a similar name in order
to obtain loan that she wa not qualifi to receiv the fbi began investig the case
after it wa contact by the victim an english professor at a univers in georgia the
professor had graduat from a colleg in arizona that the defend also briefli attend
and both women had receiv student loan that were administ through the same
compani
due to a comput mixup document belong to the professor which includ her
social secur number were sent to the defend shortli thereaft the professor began
receiv telephon call from compani that she had never heard of claim she ow them
larg sum of monei
certif diploma licens place on workplac wall
someth as innoc as a diploma profession certif or licens can be the
identifi inform that a fraudster us to obtain a fals ident in the case of a
profession licens some state requir that it be displai in a promin place
consequ inform such as the name address and licens number is readili avail
to the thief
us pretext ruse or gag call
us pretext ruse or gag call claim to be a person to whom person inform
would normal be releas is common in an ident theft sinc there is no wai to verifi
the person on the end of a phone line with photo identif have onli a small amount
of inform can yield the addit data the fraudster seek
for exampl a number of individu have report be call by peopl claim to be
court personnel the caller state that there is an outstand warrant for the individu due
to unpaid ticket or failur to appear for juri duti when the individu protest hi
innoc the caller sai that it must be a mistak and ask the individu to provid hi
driver licens number social secur number and birth date so that the caller can confirm
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11761
that a mistak ha been made the caller now ha all the inform need to steal the
individu ident
rental and loan applic
almost without except rental and loan applic yield enough inform that can be
us to establish a fals ident an applic name social secur number previou
address employ histori telephon number and credit histori ar requir to
complet the applic onc the thief get a hold of that inform it is usual quit
easi to establish an ident
public record
public record yield a wealth of person data for the ident thief real estat record tax
lien licens litig record and in some state driver licens number all reveal
enough inform that can be us to steal a person ident or least provid a start for
the fraudster
the internet
the internet offer mani opportun to the ident thief it ha made much inform
avail to more peopl at a small cost it ha also been an attract place for ident
thiev to find their victim onc you have log on inform you thought wa privat
might now be trace by anyon who is interest in find person inform about you
identifi inform such as password credit card number and in some case bank
inform ha been made avail via the internet spam or unsolicit email is
frequent respond to by mani peopl who ar unawar that the sole purpos of the e
mail is to obtain person inform
exampl
a midwestern woman wa accus of try to get a 25000 loan through an illinoi
bank us person inform she found on the internet the victim a colleg professor
call polic when the bank sent the complet applic to her home rather than to the
home of the accus the same woman reportedli obtain a mastercard under anoth
professor name and ran up almost 3000 in charg
in addit some databas compani sell inform your person inform onlin
to person or organ that you might not want to have that inform thu
increas the chanc for fraud and abus for exampl inform you provid by
consum fraud financi transact
11762 2011 fraud examin manual
respond to a questionnair onlin might be collect and sold to insur and drug
compani without your knowledg the same can be true when appli for a lowinterest
credit card or consum loan do you know who is actual receiv the inform that
you provid onlin there is no physic address to check out in most case
the internet also is a sourc for inform broker for a fee inform broker will
reveal the most person aspect of your life from financi inform to medic
inform for fee as low as 40 per search thei will disclos everyth from nonpublish
telephon number to the locat of your safeti deposit box some of it is legal
and can be found in public record but some of it is illeg
track down the thief
there ar mani wai that the fraud examin can track down an ident thief some requir
the assist of law enforc while other do not exampl of techniqu that have
been successfulli us to catch an ident thief ar
establish surveil of the address in question
have overnight deliveri servic flag the address in question
subpoena telephon record for the telephon be us by the perpetr
contact credit bureau and have them fl ag the true account holder file
contact the social secur administr to determin if the number is list twice in
the system
obtain video from retail show the perpetr make purchas us the
victim ident
obtain a copi of the perpetr pictur on the fictiti driver licens
track down address and telephon number that do not belong to the victim but show
up in their file
have the victim notifi the fraud examin when further breach occur
report the fraud to law enforc
confront the fraudster
if the fraudster ha been identifi and is to be confront the fraud examin should keep
the follow in mind
on initi contact call the fraudster by the wrong name gener he will then produc
identif in the name of the victim
try to establish the fraudster true ident
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11763
for safeti reason us caution when confront the thief never forget that the
fraudster could be a convict felon who doe not want to go back to prison
feder ident theft statut
there ar two primari feder law that address ident theft the ident theft and
assumpt deterr act and the ident theft penalti enhanc act
ident theft and assumpt deterr act
in octob 1998 congress pass the ident theft and assumpt deterr act
ident theft act to address the problem of ident theft specif the act outlaw the
intent and unauthor us of anoth individu identif with the intent to
commit a crime
it carri a maximum term of 15 year imprison a fine and crimin forfeitur of ani
person properti us or intend to be us to commit the offens the penalti is
increas to a maximum of 30 year imprison if the offens is commit to facilit
an act of terror ident theft scheme mai also involv other violat such as mail
fraud wire fraud credit card fraud or financi institut fraud
violat of the act ar investig by feder investig agenc such as the us secret
servic the fbi and the us postal inspect servic and ar prosecut by the
depart of justic
ident theft penalti enhanc act
in august 2004 congress pass the ident theft penalti enhanc act 18 usc
1028a thi act strengthen feder law on ident theft by creat a crime of aggrav
ident theft aggrav ident theft occur when an individu us a stolen ident to
commit other crime specif thi law provid that where on knowingli transfer
possess or us without law author a mean of identif of anoth dure and
in relat to ani feloni violat ofor relat to fraud embezzl fals statement
and the like an addit term of imprison of two year will be impos on the
individu in april 2005 the unit state sentenc commiss went an extra step to
impos consecut mandatori minimum sentenc of two and five year depend on the
underli offens of misus a stolen identif the guidelin becam effect
novemb 1 2005
consum fraud financi transact
11764 2011 fraud examin manual
see the chapter on the law relat to fraud in the legal section for more inform
about thi act
exampl
a wisconsin man wa sentenc to 21 month imprison and three year supervis
releas after plead guilti to ident theft the defend wa also order to pai
restitut total 62850
the perpetr pled guilti to us anoth man ident to obtain employ with a
clean compani then us that employ to commit a burglari
through hi job at the clean compani the fraudster gain access to the offic of the
wisconsin suprem court where he took six comput monitor own by the state of
wisconsin the monitor were recov almost immedi follow the burglari after the
thief abandon the vehicl that he wa drive
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act which protect custom financi inform held by
bank work in person financ creat privaci oblig for financi institut
specif financi institut have privaci oblig under the act financi privaci
rule and safeguard rule the financi privaci rule requir financi institut to
provid their custom with privaci notic explain the institut polici for
collect and share person financi inform convers the safeguard rule
requir all financi institut to design implement and maintain safeguard to protect the
confidenti and integr of custom person inform
addition the grammleachblilei act includ a provis that prohibit pretext
thi statut make it illeg for anyon to obtain custom inform from financi
institut by imperson someon els or make fals fictiti or fraudul
statement it also prohibit solicit someon els to engag in pretext violat of
thi provis can result in a fine imprison of up to 5 year or both
more inform about other provis of the grammleachblilei act can be found in
the sourc of inform chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin
manual
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11765
red flag rule
on januari 1 2008 the ident theft red flag regul red flag rule which updat
section of the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 becam effect issu
by the feder trade commiss ftc and five feder bank regulatori agenc the red
flag rule requir financi institut and creditor ie bank institut retail
util car dealer etc to develop and implement a written ident theft prevent
program to detect prevent and mitig the risk of ident theft for both new and exist
account in numer industri includ financi servic util health care and
telecommun
the agenc also issu guidelin to assist financi institut and creditor in develop
and implement a program includ a supplement that provid 26 exampl of ident
theft red flag
more inform about the red flag rule can be found in the financi institut
fraud chapter abov
state law
state have also pass law relat to ident theft below is a list of us state and
territori that have pass such law other state mai be consid legisl in their
next legisl session in addit where specif law on ident theft have not been
pass there mai be remedi under other state law
alabama alabama code 13a8192
alaska alaska stat 1146565 570
arizona ariz rev stat 132008
arkansa ark code ann 537227
california cal penal code 53058
colorado colo rev stat 185902
connecticut conn stat 53a129 crimin
conn stat 52571h civil
delawar del code ann tit 5 854
district of columbia dc offici code 2232270204
florida fla stat ann 817568
georgia ga code ann 169120 through 128
guam 9 guam code ann 4680
consum fraud financi transact
11766 2011 fraud examin manual
hawaii hi rev stat 70883968
idaho idaho code 183126 crimin
illinoi 720 ill comp stat 516g13
indiana ind code 3543535
iowa iowa code 715a8 crimin
kansa kan stat ann 214018
kentucki ky rev stat ann 514160
louisiana la rev stat ann 146716
main me rev stat ann tit 17a 905a
maryland md code ann art 27 231
massachusett mass gen law 39737e
michigan mich comp law 44565
minnesota minn stat ann 609527
mississippi miss code ann 971985
missouri mo rev stat 570223
montana mon code ann 456332
nebraska ne rev stat 28608 620
nevada nev rev state 205463465
new hampshir nh rev stat ann 63826
new jersei nj stat ann 2c2117
new mexico nm stat ann 3016241
new york ny cl penal 1907719084
north carolina nc gen stat 141132023
north dakota ndcc 1212311
ohio ohio rev code ann 291349
oklahoma okla stat tit 21 15331
oregon or rev stat 165800
pennsylvania 18 pa con stat 4120
rhode island ri gen law 1149114
south carolina sc code ann 1613510530
south dakota sd codifi law 2230a31
tennesse tca 3914150 crimin
tca 471821012103 2105 civil
texa tex penal code 3251
utah utah code ann 7661101 1104
vermont vermont code 132030
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11767
virginia va code ann 1821863
washington wash rev code 935020
west virginia w va code 61354
wisconsin wi stat 943201
wyom wyo stat ann 63901
us virgin island 14 vi code ann 3003
prevent fals ident fraud
ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel
in septemb 2006 the american nation standard institut ansi and the better
busi bureau bbb establish the ident theft prevent and ident manag standard
panel idsp 4 as a crosssector initi to catalog exist standard relat to ident theft
prevent and to identifi area where addit standard and best practic ar need to
help busi and other organ further prevent ident fraud in januari 2008 the
idsp releas a twovolum report provid a detail inventori of standard and best
practic that can be us to prevent ident theft and a number of recommend for
secur enhanc around the issuanc of ident credenti and the exchang and
mainten of ident data the ansibbb idsp report avail for download at no
charg at wwwansiorgidsp is a us tool for busi govern agenc and other
organ that wish to evalu and augment their current ident theft prevent and
ident manag practic
consum protect measur
how do you protect yourself and your client from ident theft some of the us
method ar
befor provid person inform make sure the individu or busi request
it ha a valid reason for requir the inform
never write your credit card number or social secur number on check or on the
outsid of envelop
dont give account number over the telephon or to personscompani you ar not
familiar with
4 report summari excerpt from final report volum 1 find and recommend publish by
the ansibbb ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel januari 31 2008
consum fraud financi transact
11768 2011 fraud examin manual
dont us cordless or cellular telephon or email to transmit financi or privat
person inform
keep all financi document in a secur place
if you have your driver licens inform preprint on your check shred cancel
check befor discard them
check your financi inform regularli look for what should and shouldnt
be there
obtain a copi of your credit report on a regular basi
tear up or shred preapprov credit applic
have yourself taken off of prescreen list
mail bill from the post offic or your busi locat
consid have your name and telephon number remov from the telephon
directori or have the address remov
dont provid person inform over the telephon unless you initi the call and
know who you ar speak with
if telemarket compani call tell them under the feder telephon consum
protect act i want to be on your do not call list
keep your birth certif in a safe place
choos password that will be difficult to crack and us differ password for
all account
chang password and pin code often
dont put your social secur number on ani document that you arent legal
requir to
shred ani paper with financi inform and identifi rather than simpli throw
them in the trash
in addit insur compani ar now offer insur for ident theft for an annual
fee the polici cover the cost of clear the policyhold name and correct their
financi record includ legal expens loan reapplic fee telephon and certifi
mail charg notari expens and lost wage for the time it take to deal with the fraud
what to do if your ident is stolen
start keep detail record
file a polic report with your local law enforc agenc and keep a copi of that
report mani bank and credit agenc requir such a report befor thei will
acknowledg that a theft ha occur
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11769
if your wallet or purs is stolen immedi cancel your credit and debit card and get
replac put a stop payment on all lost or stolen check
report unauthor charg and account to the appropri credit issuer and credit
bureau immedi by phone and in write chang account number or close all
account that ar affect by the fraudul activ
check for and repair further breach of your ident
notifi law enforc agenc
feder trade commiss wwwftcgov
feder bureau of investig wwwfbigov
local and state agenc
contact the three primari credit report bureau to have a secur alert or freez
place on your report and request a copi of your credit report and review it for
unauthor account activ
equifax 800 5256285 or 888 7660008
experian formerli trw 888 3973742
tran union 800 6807289
for further inform on identifi theft pleas visit the feder trade commiss
inform page at wwwconsumergovidtheft
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11801
