2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Con Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Con Schemes 
Confidence games involve a range of fraudulent conduct usually committed by professional 
“con artists” against unsuspecting victims. The victims can be organizations but more 
commonly are individuals. Con men usually act alone but they may group together for a 
particular complex endeavor.  
 
These are some of the many kinds of confidence schemes. Telemarketing schemes and 
pyramid schemes are discussed in more detail at the end of the chapter. 
 
Advance Fee Swindles and Debt Consolidation Schemes 
Advance fee swindles are structured to obtain an illegal gain by falsely promising the delivery 
of a product or a service. In some schemes, the product is marketed to a large number of 
customers and then the operation is shut down prior to the delivery stage.  
 
People who find themselves in debt sometimes turn to consolidation agencies for help. 
These agencies do not advance loans, but rather act as an intermediary between debtor and 
creditor. Some agencies are legitimate, many are not. 
 
In a typical scenario, the debtor contacts the agency, which compiles a list of the creditors 
and the amount of monthly payments. The agency usually writes letters to the creditors 
requesting a workout plan at lower monthly payments spread over a longer period of time. 
The creditors will often offer such an arrangement if they feel that the debt will thereby be 
paid or if the workout plan will forestall bankruptcy or default by the creditor. 
                                                          
1John Braithwaite, “An Exploratory Study of Used Car Fr aud,” in Paul R. Wilson and John Braithwaite (Eds.), 
Two Faces of Deviance. Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1978, pp. 101-122.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1703 
Unscrupulous debt consolidation schemes often involve the agency collecting the money 
from the debtor but not forwarding it to the creditors. In some instances, considerable time 
can pass before the debtor finds out that his money has been misappropriated. 
 
Another variation of the debt consolidation scheme occurs when a customer is guaranteed 
that he will receive a loan or a credit card regardless of his credit rating. Typically, the victims 
have been rejected by legitimate financial institutions because their credit ratings are poor. 
The victim must pay a processing fee for the application to be accepted. After the victim 
pays the fee, the con artist disappears.  
 
Directory Advertising Schemes 
The essence of directory advertising schemes is the sale of advertising in a non-existent 
magazine or directory. A fake (or in some cases a real) directory is shown to the potential 
victim. The victim contracts and pays for display or classified advertising that is to appear 
some months in the future. By that time, the fraudster has disappeared. 
  
Merchandising Schemes 
Merchandising schemes run a wide gamut. If you have ever paid for an item and received  
less than what was advertised, you have been the victim of a merchandising scheme.  
 
Personal Improvement Frauds 
These frauds prey upon the desire of people to improve their education or job skills; in some 
instances, they appeal to a person’s appearance.  
  
Diploma Mills 
For what is often a hefty fee, a diploma can be purchased by those who apply. The fraudster 
usually claims that the fee is for processing the application or for verifying the experience 
necessary for the degree to be awarded. The hallmark of the diploma mill is the ease with 
which the degree is obtained, though the degree, because the school is not accredited, is 
essentially worthless. 
 
Correspondence schools may also operate with the same modus operandi as diploma mills. 
Investigators have at times submitted the scribblings of their infant children to schools that 
advertise that they will provide art lessons to persons who demonstrate talent; usually the 
infants’ “drawings” are judged to show considerable ability, and the submitter is asked to 
send a fee to begin receiving the lessons. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1704                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Modeling Schools 
Modeling schools appeal to the vanity of some people. In the typical scheme, the modeling 
school representative tells the prospective student that he will prepare a portfolio of portraits 
to be sent to potential customers who may employ the victim as a model. The victim is then 
charged an inflated price for the pictures. Con game modeling schools often claim —
 inaccurately — connections to famous people and maintain that they have been instrumental 
in starting the careers of successful models. The schools sometimes target parents and 
grandparents with lures of the money that can be earned by their “exceptionally pretty” 
infant children or grandchildren. 
 
Direct Debit from Checking Accounts     
When a customer decides to purchase an item (from a catalog or over the phone), he is told 
he can purchase it rapidly and simply by giving his bank’s name and his checking account 
number for a direct debit from his account. This results in unauthorized withdrawals from 
the account. 
 
Equity-Skimming Schemes    
Falling for this scam can cost consumers their homes. Con men try to talk the mark out of 
the equity on their homes and may try to persuade them to borrow against their equity. 
 
Fundraising, Non-profits, and Religious Schemes    
Some groups use “cancer” or “AIDS” in their title to convince the consumer they are 
legitimate charitable organizations. Others o ffer a prize or award for the consumer as a 
reward for their contribution.  
 
Home-Based Businesses    
A popular fad today, many companies marketing home-based businesses require a person to 
buy materials for assembly-at-home products. The consumer is promised that the company 
will purchase the completed products, and when it does not, the consumer is left with a bad 
investment and a stock of cheap, worthless goods. 
 
Home Improvements    
A common scam involves phony repair people selling their services door-to-door. After 
paying them to fix a roof, window, or other item, the consumer is left with unfinished repair 
work and no workmen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1705 
Money Manager or Financial Planner    
These scams involve convincing marks to invest in low-risk, high-return opportunities. Of 
course, consumers who invest in these opportunities see no returns at all. 
 
Phone Card Schemes    
The con artist calls, claiming to be with the consumer’s long distance company, and asks to 
confirm their card number. If the number is revealed, the consumer’s next long distance bill 
will contain some expensive calls he did not make.  
 
Scavenger or Revenge Scheme    
This involves the company that initially conned the consumer. Using a different company’s 
name, the outfit contacts the consumer again and asks if he would like to help put the 
unethical company out of business and get his money back. Naturally, an up-front fee is 
required to finance the investigation. 
 
Sweepstakes, Giveaways, and Prizes    
Many of these so-called “free gifts” require the consumer to pay a fee (usually labeled a 
“shipping” fee) before collecting. This fee actually covers the cost of the merchandise 
deemed “free.” 
 
College Scholarship Services    
This bogus service usually charges an up-front fee or advanced payment fee for finding a 
scholarship suitable for the applicant. 
 
Credit Repair    
Some of these firms may charge unnecessary fees to fix credit problems, knowing that the 
consumer could easily call the credit bureau and request a copy of his credit report himself. 
 
Other Con Schemes 
Block Hustle    
So-called because purveyors of cheap stereo equipment, jewelry, and watches usually hawk 
their goods on street corners or at traffic lights. The items for sale are generally either stolen 
or imitations of brand names. 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1706                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Pigeon Drop   
This is often used on middle-aged or elderly women who are likely to have a savings 
account. Pretending to find a wallet full of money, the con men convince their mark that 
they should divide the “discovered” money. As a show of good faith, each should withdraw 
a sum of money from their bank and turn it over to a lawyer or another third-party for 
safekeeping. They agree to place an ad in a newspaper for the lost wallet. If it is not claimed 
within a certain amount of time, they will split the money. Of course, when the designated 
time expires, the victim will find that the lawyer was part of the scam and that her money has 
vanished. 
 
Bank Examiner Swindle     
Bank examiner swindles are also perpetrated on older women, especially widows with access 
to their husbands’ life insurance policies. The con man impersonates a bank examiner 
investigating her bank. He asks her to withdraw a certain amount of cash from her account, 
place it in an envelope, and allow him to inspect the bills for counterfeits. Many con men use 
false IDs and dress to take on this role. 
 
Jamaican Handkerchief or Envelope Switch    
In this con, the criminal puts his money into an envelope with the mark’s money and then 
unobtrusively trades this parcel for another that looks like the same thing but is instead 
bulked up with worthless paper. 
 
The Obituary Hustle   
Capitalizing on a bereaved person’s grief, the con man, culling information from an obituary, 
poses as a delivery person collecting money for a package or other order the deceased 
supposedly made.  
 
Three-Card Monte    
An old card game that involves two people who fleece an unsuspecting onlooker into a 
rigged game. 
 
Poker Bunco    
This scam can involve poker, dice, pool, and other games. The con man is of course an 
expert and hustles the mark. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1707 
Missing-Heir Scheme    
In the modern version of this scam, the con man poses as a probate investigator or other 
genealogist, charging fees to distribute an inheritance. 
 
Gold Mine Swindle    
Here, the con man claims to own a productive mine but requires money to start operation. 
The scheme involves selling shares to the mine. 
 
Spanish Prisoner Game    
This con can be traced back to the Spanish Armada of the sixteenth century. A businessman 
receives a letter purportedly from a hostage held prisoner in some foreign land. He needs 
money to bribe his captors or pay a ransom. As collateral, a treasure map or other “valuable 
papers” are often enclosed. 
 
Murphy Game    
Also known as “Miss Murphy,” “paddy hustle,” or “carpet game,” the traditional con is 
played in places where prostitution occurs. The con artist plays a pimp but never delivers the 
prostitute. 
 
Badger Game    
A refined version of Miss Murphy, but in this con, the con woman or prostitute is in on the 
scam. The con artist robs the mark of his wallet through simple theft or pretense of 
blackmail. 
 
Goat Pasture Scam    
The mark receives a call from a person who says he’s from an oil and gas service that is 
sponsoring a lottery on mineral rights. If the consumer invests a certain tax deductible sum, 
they can receive a percentage of the income in royalty payments. 
 
Other common hustles occur in the privacy of one’s own home or through telephone 
solicitations (i.e., boiler rooms). 
 
 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1708                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telemarkting Fraud 
Victims of telemarketing fraud are swindled out of more than $40 billion a year. According 
to one survey, 92 percent of U.S. adults say they have received postcards or letters promising 
they had “definitely” been awarded a “guaranteed” prize. Of those responding, 69 percent 
never received the promised prizes. Telemarketers select victims deliberately, targeting the 
elderly and the unemployed. Over 5.5 million Americans said they had bought items by 
telephone in the past two years and were exploited in the process. 
 
While the telephone, newspaper, and postal service used to be the key tools of telemarketers, 
the Internet has afforded fraudsters a more fast paced and anonymous method of carrying 
out their schemes. The number one scam to be currently found on the Internet, says the 
National Consumer League’s Fraud Watch (NCL), is the fake check scam, in which 
consumers are paid with a phony check for work or items sold and are instructed to wire 
money back. This has been the number one ranking telemarketing fraud for two years 
running. Advance fee scams and phishing also rank in the top 10 schemes on the World 
Wide Web. A discussion of some of the specific Internet schemes can be found in the 
“Computer and Internet Fraud” chapter in the Financial Transactions section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual. 
 
Telemarketing offenses are classified as consumer fraud, yet many businesses are affected by 
office supply and marketing services scams. The hit-and-run nature of phone rooms, the 
geographical distances between the crooks and their victims, and the resources and priorities 
of law enforcement agencies all make enforcement efforts difficult. Only about one in 100 
victims ever files a complaint. 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1709 
NCLs Top 10 


:


con scheme
confid game involv a rang of fraudul conduct usual commit by profession
con artist against unsuspect victim the victim can be organ but more
commonli ar individu con men usual act alon but thei mai group togeth for a
particular complex endeavor
these ar some of the mani kind of confid scheme telemarket scheme and
pyramid scheme ar discuss in more detail at the end of the chapter
advanc fee swindl and debt consolid scheme
advanc fee swindl ar structur to obtain an illeg gain by fals promis the deliveri
of a product or a servic in some scheme the product is market to a larg number of
custom and then the oper is shut down prior to the deliveri stage
peopl who find themselv in debt sometim turn to consolid agenc for help
these agenc do not advanc loan but rather act as an intermediari between debtor and
creditor some agenc ar legitim mani ar not
in a typic scenario the debtor contact the agenc which compil a list of the creditor
and the amount of monthli payment the agenc usual write letter to the creditor
request a workout plan at lower monthli payment spread over a longer period of time
the creditor will often offer such an arrang if thei feel that the debt will therebi be
paid or if the workout plan will forestal bankruptci or default by the creditor
1john braithwait an exploratori studi of us car fr aud in paul r wilson and john braithwait ed
two face of devianc brisban univers of queensland press 1978 pp 101122
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11703
unscrupul debt consolid scheme often involv the agenc collect the monei
from the debtor but not forward it to the creditor in some instanc consider time
can pass befor the debtor find out that hi monei ha been misappropri
anoth variat of the debt consolid scheme occur when a custom is guarante
that he will receiv a loan or a credit card regardless of hi credit rate typic the victim
have been reject by legitim financi institut becaus their credit rate ar poor
the victim must pai a process fee for the applic to be accept after the victim
pai the fee the con artist disappear
directori advertis scheme
the essenc of directori advertis scheme is the sale of advertis in a nonexist
magazin or directori a fake or in some case a real directori is shown to the potenti
victim the victim contract and pai for displai or classifi advertis that is to appear
some month in the futur by that time the fraudster ha disappear
merchandis scheme
merchandis scheme run a wide gamut if you have ever paid for an item and receiv
less than what wa advertis you have been the victim of a merchandis scheme
person improv fraud
these fraud prei upon the desir of peopl to improv their educ or job skill in some
instanc thei appeal to a person appear
diploma mill
for what is often a hefti fee a diploma can be purchas by those who appli the fraudster
usual claim that the fee is for process the applic or for verifi the experi
necessari for the degre to be award the hallmark of the diploma mill is the eas with
which the degre is obtain though the degre becaus the school is not accredit is
essenti worthless
correspond school mai also oper with the same modu operandi as diploma mill
investig have at time submit the scribbl of their infant children to school that
advertis that thei will provid art lesson to person who demonstr talent usual the
infant draw ar judg to show consider abil and the submitt is ask to
send a fee to begin receiv the lesson
consum fraud financi transact
11704 2011 fraud examin manual
model school
model school appeal to the vaniti of some peopl in the typic scheme the model
school repres tell the prospect student that he will prepar a portfolio of portrait
to be sent to potenti custom who mai emploi the victim as a model the victim is then
charg an inflat price for the pictur con game model school often claim
inaccur connect to famou peopl and maintain that thei have been instrument
in start the career of success model the school sometim target parent and
grandpar with lure of the monei that can be earn by their exception pretti
infant children or grandchildren
direct debit from check account
when a custom decid to purchas an item from a catalog or over the phone he is told
he can purchas it rapidli and simpli by give hi bank name and hi check account
number for a direct debit from hi account thi result in unauthor withdraw from
the account
equityskim scheme
fall for thi scam can cost consum their home con men try to talk the mark out of
the equiti on their home and mai try to persuad them to borrow against their equiti
fundrais nonprofit and religi scheme
some group us cancer or aid in their titl to convinc the consum thei ar
legitim charit organ other o ffer a prize or award for the consum as a
reward for their contribut
homebas busi
a popular fad todai mani compani market homebas busi requir a person to
bui materi for assemblyathom product the consum is promis that the compani
will purchas the complet product and when it doe not the consum is left with a bad
invest and a stock of cheap worthless good
home improv
a common scam involv phoni repair peopl sell their servic doortodoor after
pai them to fix a roof window or other item the consum is left with unfinish repair
work and no workmen
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11705
monei manag or financi planner
these scam involv convinc mark to invest in lowrisk highreturn opportun of
cours consum who invest in these opportun see no return at all
phone card scheme
the con artist call claim to be with the consum long distanc compani and ask to
confirm their card number if the number is reveal the consum next long distanc bill
will contain some expens call he did not make
scaveng or reveng scheme
thi involv the compani that initi con the consum us a differ compani
name the outfit contact the consum again and ask if he would like to help put the
uneth compani out of busi and get hi monei back natur an upfront fee is
requir to financ the investig
sweepstak giveawai and prize
mani of these socal free gift requir the consum to pai a fee usual label a
ship fee befor collect thi fee actual cover the cost of the merchandis
deem free
colleg scholarship servic
thi bogu servic usual charg an upfront fee or advanc payment fee for find a
scholarship suitabl for the applic
credit repair
some of these firm mai charg unnecessari fee to fix credit problem know that the
consum could easili call the credit bureau and request a copi of hi credit report himself
other con scheme
block hustl
socal becaus purveyor of cheap stereo equip jewelri and watch usual hawk
their good on street corner or at traffic light the item for sale ar gener either stolen
or imit of brand name
consum fraud financi transact
11706 2011 fraud examin manual
pigeon drop
thi is often us on middleag or elderli women who ar like to have a save
account pretend to find a wallet full of monei the con men convinc their mark that
thei should divid the discov monei as a show of good faith each should withdraw
a sum of monei from their bank and turn it over to a lawyer or anoth thirdparti for
safekeep thei agre to place an ad in a newspap for the lost wallet if it is not claim
within a certain amount of time thei will split the monei of cours when the design
time expir the victim will find that the lawyer wa part of the scam and that her monei ha
vanish
bank examin swindl
bank examin swindl ar also perpetr on older women especi widow with access
to their husband life insur polici the con man imperson a bank examin
investig her bank he ask her to withdraw a certain amount of cash from her account
place it in an envelop and allow him to inspect the bill for counterfeit mani con men us
fals id and dress to take on thi role
jamaican handkerchief or envelop switch
in thi con the crimin put hi monei into an envelop with the mark monei and then
unobtrus trade thi parcel for anoth that look like the same thing but is instead
bulk up with worthless paper
the obituari hustl
capit on a bereav person grief the con man cull inform from an obituari
pose as a deliveri person collect monei for a packag or other order the deceas
supposedli made
threecard mont
an old card game that involv two peopl who fleec an unsuspect onlook into a
rig game
poker bunco
thi scam can involv poker dice pool and other game the con man is of cours an
expert and hustl the mark
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11707
missingheir scheme
in the modern version of thi scam the con man pose as a probat investig or other
genealogist charg fee to distribut an inherit
gold mine swindl
here the con man claim to own a product mine but requir monei to start oper
the scheme involv sell share to the mine
spanish prison game
thi con can be trace back to the spanish armada of the sixteenth centuri a businessman
receiv a letter purportedli from a hostag held prison in some foreign land he need
monei to bribe hi captor or pai a ransom as collater a treasur map or other valuabl
paper ar often enclos
murphi game
also known as miss murphi paddi hustl or carpet game the tradit con is
plai in place where prostitut occur the con artist plai a pimp but never deliv the
prostitut
badger game
a refin version of miss murphi but in thi con the con woman or prostitut is in on the
scam the con artist rob the mark of hi wallet through simpl theft or pretens of
blackmail
goat pastur scam
the mark receiv a call from a person who sai he from an oil and ga servic that is
sponsor a lotteri on miner right if the consum invest a certain tax deduct sum
thei can receiv a percentag of the incom in royalti payment
other common hustl occur in the privaci of on own home or through telephon
solicit ie boiler room
consum fraud financi transact
11708 2011 fraud examin manual
telemarkt fraud
victim of telemarket fraud ar swindl out of more than 40 billion a year accord
to on survei 92 percent of us adult sai thei have receiv postcard or letter promis
thei had definit been award a guarante prize of those respond 69 percent
never receiv the promis prize telemarket select victim deliber target the
elderli and the unemploi over 55 million american said thei had bought item by
telephon in the past two year and were exploit in the process
while the telephon newspap and postal servic us to be the kei tool of telemarket
the internet ha afford fraudster a more fast pace and anonym method of carri
out their scheme the number on scam to be current found on the internet sai the
nation consum leagu fraud watch ncl is the fake check scam in which
consum ar paid with a phoni check for work or item sold and ar instruct to wire
monei back thi ha been the number on rank telemarket fraud for two year
run advanc fee scam and phish also rank in the top 10 scheme on the world
wide web a discuss of some of the specif internet scheme can be found in the
comput and internet fraud chapter in the financi transact section of the fraud
examin manual
telemarket offens ar classifi as consum fraud yet mani busi ar affect by
offic suppli and market servic scam the hitandrun natur of phone room the
geograph distanc between the crook and their victim and the resourc and prioriti
of law enforc agenc all make enforc effort difficult onli about on in 100
victim ever file a complaint
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11709
ncl top 10
