2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Con Schemes/Advance Fee Swindles and Debt Consolidation Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Advance Fee Swindles and Debt Consolidation Schemes 
Advance fee swindles are structured to obtain an illegal gain by falsely promising the delivery 
of a product or a service. In some schemes, the product is marketed to a large number of 
customers and then the operation is shut down prior to the delivery stage.  
 
People who find themselves in debt sometimes turn to consolidation agencies for help. 
These agencies do not advance loans, but rather act as an intermediary between debtor and 
creditor. Some agencies are legitimate, many are not. 
 
In a typical scenario, the debtor contacts the agency, which compiles a list of the creditors 
and the amount of monthly payments. The agency usually writes letters to the creditors 
requesting a workout plan at lower monthly payments spread over a longer period of time. 
The creditors will often offer such an arrangement if they feel that the debt will thereby be 
paid or if the workout plan will forestall bankruptcy or default by the creditor. 
                                                          
1John Braithwaite, “An Exploratory Study of Used Car Fr aud,” in Paul R. Wilson and John Braithwaite (Eds.), 
Two Faces of Deviance. Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1978, pp. 101-122.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1703 
Unscrupulous debt consolidation schemes often involve the agency collecting the money 
from the debtor but not forwarding it to the creditors. In some instances, considerable time 
can pass before the debtor finds out that his money has been misappropriated. 
 
Another variation of the debt consolidation scheme occurs when a customer is guaranteed 
that he will receive a loan or a credit card regardless of his credit rating. Typically, the victims 
have been rejected by legitimate financial institutions because their credit ratings are poor. 
The victim must pay a processing fee for the application to be accepted. After the victim 
pays the fee, the con artist disappears.  
 



:


advanc fee swindl and debt consolid scheme
advanc fee swindl ar structur to obtain an illeg gain by fals promis the deliveri
of a product or a servic in some scheme the product is market to a larg number of
custom and then the oper is shut down prior to the deliveri stage
peopl who find themselv in debt sometim turn to consolid agenc for help
these agenc do not advanc loan but rather act as an intermediari between debtor and
creditor some agenc ar legitim mani ar not
in a typic scenario the debtor contact the agenc which compil a list of the creditor
and the amount of monthli payment the agenc usual write letter to the creditor
request a workout plan at lower monthli payment spread over a longer period of time
the creditor will often offer such an arrang if thei feel that the debt will therebi be
paid or if the workout plan will forestal bankruptci or default by the creditor
1john braithwait an exploratori studi of us car fr aud in paul r wilson and john braithwait ed
two face of devianc brisban univers of queensland press 1978 pp 101122
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11703
unscrupul debt consolid scheme often involv the agenc collect the monei
from the debtor but not forward it to the creditor in some instanc consider time
can pass befor the debtor find out that hi monei ha been misappropri
anoth variat of the debt consolid scheme occur when a custom is guarante
that he will receiv a loan or a credit card regardless of hi credit rate typic the victim
have been reject by legitim financi institut becaus their credit rate ar poor
the victim must pai a process fee for the applic to be accept after the victim
pai the fee the con artist disappear
