2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Telemarketing Frauds 
 
2008 Top 10 Frauds  
 
2009 Top 10 Frauds  
 
Fake Check Scams 61% Fake Check Scams 52% 
Prizes/Sweepstakes 12% Prizes/Sweepstakes 21% 
Phishing 10.5% Phishing 13% 
Advance Fee Loans/Credit Arrangers 2% Internet: General Merchandise 3% 
Lotteries/Lottery Ticket Clubs 2% Scholarships/Educational Grants 1% 
Internet: General Merchandise 1.5% Advance Fee Loans/Credit Arrangers  1% 
Magazines 1.5% Magazine Sales 1 
Scholarships/Educational Grants 1% Lotteries/Lottery Ticket Clubs 1% 
Office: Ad Space/Directory List ings 1% Telephone : Cramming .5% 
Credit Card Issuing .5% Business Opportunities/Franchises .5% 
 
Telemarketing Terminology 
Terms in the scammer’s vocabulary include banging, or  nailing, the customer, in other words, 
closing the deal. A salesperson’s most effective skill is puffing, the ability to sound convincing 
while exaggerating the value of a business opportunity or gift. To make the puffing more 
persuasive, marketers hire singers or criers to tell potential victims what a great deal they are 
getting. Calls from angry customers who realize they have been swindled are known as heat 
calls. These are handled by someone claiming to be the company’s manager or vice-president. 
 
Boiler Room Staff 
Work in a boiler room is shared by fronters, closers, and verifiers.  
 
Fronters
The fronter calls victims and makes the initial pitch. This low-level worker is usually 
breaking into the business and reads from a script to the prospective customer. Fronters 
seldom see the merchandise or know the full extent of the operation. Keeping fronters in 
the dark, at least in theory, limits what they can tell investigators and protects them in the 
event of prosecution. 
  
Closers 
The closer is a veteran. Fronters pass an interested caller to their closer, identified as the 
firm’s “manager,” who convinces the person to buy.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1710                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Verifiers 
Next, the caller is passed to a verifier, who reads some vague words about the deal and 
records the person’s agreement. These recordings are intentionally vague, leaving out the 
pitch and key details, essentially recording only the customer’s consent. Verifiers also stall 
customers who call back to complain (heat calls), finding reasons why a little more patience 
will solve the problem, and in some cases, convincing the person to send a little more money 
to help the process along. 
 
Staff Exploitation 
The customers of fraudulent telemarketing operations are not the only victims. Fronters are 
often poorly educated and easily taken advantage of by the career criminals who run the 
operations. Salespeople may face hidden costs in a work agreement, similar to the ones 
involved in the items they push on unsuspecting customers. For example, boiler room 
operators hold back parts of their phone lists and sell them to crew members as “hot leads.” 
Telescam veterans know how to operate a gift sting that bilks both the customer and the 
salesperson. Operators overstate the retail value of the gifts, so the customers get less than 
they paid for; then, by giving agents an inflated wholesale cost, the operators can pay these 
workers less commission, which is figured on the “profit margin” between wholesale  
and retail.  
 
The salespeople in boiler rooms are sometimes as desperate as their victims. Most are 
unemployed, with little education or marketable skills. Telemarketing promises easy work 
and big pay without any experience. Many pe ople who start out as fronters, however, are 
serving an apprenticeship in their criminal careers. They are wooed with cars, cellular 
phones, and other perks. Former workers have reported that supervisors sprinkled lines of 
cocaine along the phone bank table, and threw handfuls of money into the air, promising the 
proceeds to whoever made the next sale. 
 
Naturally, there are no Social Security or payroll taxes deducted from paychecks, so 
employees can owe big tax bills at the end of the year. Fronters’ commission payments are 
often shorted, or withheld. Paychecks frequently fail to clear the bank. Owners promise big 
profit shares for a month or two, then shut down the business. They tell the workers that 
their assets have been frozen by creditors or regulators. Workers lose their jobs and usually 
their last weeks’ commissions. For the last few months, however, the owners have been 
taking in $25,000 to $30,000 a week. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1711 
Telemarketing Suppliers 
The telemarketing industry relies on a number of sources to supply its phone scripts, mailing 
lists, merchandise, phone banks, and autodialers. Mailing lists and phone lists are sold for a 
few cents per name. Lists of people who have been stung before or who have bad credit 
records fetch between 10 and fifteen cents per name. By supplying telemarketers with the 
tools of their trade, these companies make telescamming possible. Many of the suppliers are 
aware of telemarketers’ criminal intentions and choose to ignore them.  
 
Turnkeys 
Turnkeys comprise an industry of their own by providing the collateral a telemarketing scam 
needs: turnkeys launder credit card receipts and checks, sell autodialers and phone lists, and 
provide the merchandise portrayed as valuable prizes.  
 
Legitimate businesses, however, are routinely implicated in this scurrilous industry. The U.S. 
Postal Service, for instance, carries tons of telemarketing ads. In the early days of the 
industry, telemarketers used the Postal Service to deliver merchandise C.O.D., but when the 
postal service mounted an aggressive campaign against fraud, companies turned to credit 
card billings to avoid the scrutiny. They also use parcel delivery services or overnighters, 
which are not subject to federal mail fraud laws. By keeping the value of the merchandise 
just below $300, telemarketers avoid the minimum amount at which postal inspectors are 
required to investigate fraud. 
 
Independent Service Organizations 
Telemarketers often have difficulty securing credit card services from reputable institutions. 
Many banks will not open credit-processing a ccounts for businesses who do a substantial 
amount of their business in phone sales because these accounts typically incur a high rate of 
chargebacks. Federal law gives consumers 60 days to protest charges to their cards, and if 
successful, the issuer has to absorb the loss. MasterCard and Visa estimate their losses from 
phone fraud at $300 million a year.  
 
Telemarketing operations have learned the difficulties they face when dealing directly with 
banks. To circumvent this obstacle, phone sales companies hire “independent service 
organizations,” which approach banks on the telemarketer’s behalf. The service company 
agrees with the bank to cover any chargebacks from the operation. The telemarketer is 
required to post a large bond to cover potential losses, so the service organization is also 
protected from loss. However, even with a half-million dollar bond, the reserve funds can be 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1712                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
quickly depleted when customers start to realize they have been swindled, leaving the service 
company and/or the bank with enormous losses.  
 
Factoring Companies 
Telemarketing operations also commonly engage factoring companies. These groups buy 
credit card receipts from telemarketing concerns at a discount, then use their merchant bank 
accounts to convert the receipts into cash. Some factors charge as much as 30 percent of the 
receipts’ gross value to launder the slips. Factoring is illegal in some states, though crooks 
find ways to slip through loopholes or disguise their alliances.  
 
International Factoring Companies 
Factoring through Asian and European merchants is becoming increasingly common. 
Factoring companies in these countries tend to charge a lower price for their services than 
some other countries—between nine and 10 percent of the gross. Regardless of their locale, 
factors have the opportunity to make a great profit. They also, however, face the risk that 
banks will freeze their accounts or sue them for excessive chargebacks. In response to the 
losses suffered at the hands of dishonest telemarketers, banks and credit card companies 
have started reviewing their accounts to locate those businesses with inordinate numbers of 
chargebacks. The financial institution closes these accounts, and may file suit if the account 
holder can be located. 
 
Check-Cashing Establishments 
Another convenient tool at the telemarketer’s disposal is the check-cashing store. If a boiler 
room operation wishes to avoid the risks of setting up a bank account that might be traced 
or seized, customers’ personal checks are taken to a company that cashes them for a small 
fee. These establishments rarely require any identification to cash the checks. Customers may 
complain and try to stop payment on their checks, but they are ordinarily too late.  
 
Common Telemarketing Scams 
Senior Scams 
Older people are the favorite prey of telescammers.  In the U.S., they make up 11 percent of 
the population but constitute 32 percent of the victims of consumer fraud and 50 percent of 
all phone scam victims. Forty-five percent of senior citizens have been offered investments 
by a person unknown to them. Seniors own more than half of all financial assets in the U.S. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1713 
Fred Schulte, author of Fleeced!, relates the pitch delivered to an elderly woman in 
Philadelphia by Tim O’Neil. The woman told detectives about the more than $10,000 for 
which O’Neil and his lieutenants swindled her. O’Neil’s call to mollify the woman’s protests 
was recorded by the FBI. On the line, he insists the “collectibles” the woman bought, 
including “actual bullets excavated from the Civil War,” are genuine and valuable.  
 
Do you wear pendants? This is a beautiful, is a diamond … I’m not gonna ask you to 
spend a penny … 
  
How old are you? God bless you … 89 … 
  
We’re gonna get that out to you … Look for it  in the middle of next week, and then give 
us a call and then let us know how you like it … 
 
Well I hope I put a little sunshine in your day. Okay, honey and God bless you. Oh don’t 
cry now, we’re here to take care of you … We’ll  be here and if you need to talk to anybody 
at any time you give us a call okay? Bye, bye, and God bless you. 
 
Telemarketers usually call in the evening. Nighttime calls find people of every age in more 
impulsive moods. Seniors may be more vulnerable to pitches promising them extra money 
and luxury goods because many live on fixed incomes. These lottery-style gambits can seem 
like an easy way for the elderly to improve their financial status.  
 
Targeting the Unemployed 
The unemployed are another favorite target for sweepstakes pitches and job search services. 
Whereas “the system” has left the jobless without hope, the telemarketer offers a way 
around official channels. People with bad credit pay telemarketers to “repair” their credit 
record or get a major card. Instead, they get a list of banks that offer credit cards, commonly 
published in newspapers, or an application for a card that requires a security deposit for 
activation, usually several hundred or a thousand dollars. These people are also targeted by 
advance-fee loan scams, which promise loans in exchange for a fee. 
 
Affinity Fraud 
Affinity fraud targets groups of people who have some social connection. Neighborhoods 
chiefly populated by racial minorities, especially immigrant groups, are often the site of 
affinity frauds. Religious and professional ties are often exploited. Marketing technology has 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1714                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
made it possible for a company to buy targeted lists, not just by location, but according to 
buying habits, leisure time activities, and club memberships. The most expensive lists carry 
the names of people who have already fallen for a telemarketing scam. This is called reloading.  
 
Chief among telescammers’ tricks is obfuscation. Salespeople read off lists of prizes, 
emphasizing big-ticket items like jewelry and cars, not mentioning that the odds of actually 
winning anything besides a trinket are astronomical. Schulte relates an incident in which 
victims were told they had won a Winnebago. Victims were asked to pay a handling fee of 
$2,900, a fraction of the cost of a new travel home. About two months later, victims found a 
delivery driver at their door with a Winnebago tent.  
 
Some operations actually encourage their marks to call and check with the Better Business 
Bureau (BBB) and with former customers, giving out the numbers for the person to call. 
These numbers ring at phony lines set up by the scammers, who give out a glowing 
recommendation. Phone rooms have been known to set up reference arms with titles like 
“The Better Business Bureau of America” or “International Better Business Bureau” to 
recommend their ventures. If a potential victim does reach the Better Business Bureau, 
chances are the report will contain little or nothing of use. The information in these files is 
usually ambiguous and out of date. 
 
Consolation 
When irate customers call telemarketers back to complain, their calls are routed to 
professionals who placate the caller with more promises and obfuscations. Some boiler 
rooms have a prearranged communication route for leading complaints through four or five 
different “departments.” This tactic causes many callers to eventually hang up without 
having spoken to anyone. In some instances, telemarketers confronted with furious callers 
threatening legal action do award something of value to the customer, though the item is 
usually worth far less than the person has paid. 
 
If obfuscation and consolation prizes fail to appease the caller, the con turns to threats and 
intimidation. This is a favorite method for dealing with senior citizens, especially elderly 
women. Threats are used not just to keep customers from filing complaints, but to cajole 
more money out of them. Some telemarketers have actually threatened callers’ personal 
safety if they refused to pay. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1715 
The odds in favor of catching a boiler room operation in progress are usually poor. 
Operations can select a town, set up a room, make their haul, and leave again in a matter of 
weeks or months. When authorities raid a boiler room, the operation has typically already 
moved on. If the company owners registered with state regulators, they probably did so 
under an alias. By the time police arrive, the perpetrators have moved on and the chances of 
finding them are slim.  
 
800 Numbers 
Toll-free 800 numbers (or other toll-free prefixes, such as 866, 877, or 888) offered by 
phone service companies are used by some operations. The scam is a toll-free line, 
advertised in mailers, fliers, and newspaper ads, to lure victims into making the call 
themselves. The toll-free number usually carries a recording that directs customers to a 900 
number that charges the caller between $3 and $10 a minute to hear recorded messages. A 
favorite device of sellers is to insist that the offer being made is good for less than 48 hours. 
To secure the opportunity, the customer hands over a cashier’s check to an overnight-delivery 
service. Even if the victim does have second thoughts, he will be unable to stop 
payment on a cashier’s check.  
 
Automatic Debits 
The personal checking account is one of the most convenient tools for defrauding 
telemarketing customers, thanks to advances in electronic banking technology. Using 
computerized transfers, businesses can set up an automatic debit to the buyer’s account. 
Telemarketing operations use this device to obtain payment before victims can change their 
minds about their purchases. Worse, telemarketers can simply use the information to drain 
the victim’s account. This information is usua lly obtained by telling the victim that the 
account numbers are needed to verify eligibility for a giveaway or business opportunity. 
Banks are not responsible for any losses customers suffer in this way, so there are no 
chargebacks and little recourse for the swindled customer besides filing a complaint. Even if 
an investigation of the complaint brings the scammer to court, the chances that the victim 
will receive restitution are poor. 
 
Business Opportunities (Biz Ops) 
Many telemarketing frauds are aimed at people starting their own businesses. Regulators put 
losses in fraudulent business opportunities at over $100 million a year, and most observers 
think the number is far higher.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1716                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Work-at-Home Schemes 
Besides franchise offers and other miscellaneous business scams, the most prevalent frauds 
involve work-at-home schemes and FCC-related investments. Victims of these phony 
offerings do not see themselves as part of the telemarketer’s prey. They believe they are 
making a legitimate business investment. 
 
Biz op promoters often use a team approach in their enterprises. The victim usually sees an 
ad and calls a fronter, who makes the introductory pitch and then passes the victim to a 
higher-up. Next, the caller is put through to a crier who endorses the opportunity and tells 
the victim of the profits he made. Finally, a closer seals the deal and gets the payment secured 
as quickly as possible.  
 
Telemarketers use business-related terms such as exclusive territory, annual gross revenues, and 
emerging markets in these calls. This helps convince the mark that the biz op is legitimate. A 
Louis Harris poll found that 1 in 33 cold calls for investments were successful. 
 
Some business-pitch operations are complete fabrications. They offer envelope stuffing or 
book-review enterprises that do not really exist. Scammers mail out postcards or buy cheap 
ads in magazines and newspapers. Some may not even take any phone calls. The ads 
convince the victims to send money to a mailbox. Unlike the U.S. Postal Service, which 
requires identification from renters and divulges this information to anyone who inquires, 
private companies will rent mail-drops to anyone for a few dollars a month and can refuse to 
say who paid for the box.  
 
Fly and Buy 
Some scams involve ventures such as vending machines, pay phones, and merchandise 
display racks. They often gain credibility by setting up a front operation and inviting 
investors for tours. This part of the ruse is known as the “fly and buy.” For example, the 
Securities Division of the State of Washington prosecuted a case on behalf of a woman who 
traveled to Colorado and met with a promoter. The promoter offered to let her in on a deal 
for video pool and video bowling games. Thrilled with the demonstration and her tour 
guide’s promises of quick profits, she paid $13,000 for machines that broke down in less 
than three months. When the woman complained to the promoter about the shoddiness of 
the machines, she was sent two new ones along with a bill. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1717 
Shoddy merchandise is a familiar element of the biz op scam. The scams are tailored for the 
targeted audience. A Maryland ring ran advertisements in Income Plus magazine and other 
investor-oriented publications for a solar-powered car battery recharger. “In seconds, you’re 
off and running,” the ad claimed. The offer stated that distributors were making over 
$200,000 a year with the revolutionary devices. But the machines were worthless. One 
investor took the recharger to an electrician, and was told it could recharge a battery but that 
it would take a few weeks.  
 
Vending Machine and Pay Phone Scams 
Buyers are promised exclusive territories, but find the same area has been sold to many 
people. Often, the machines do not work or they simply do not make any money. Sooner or 
later, the ruse is exposed. But in the short term, the operators can make substantial proceeds.  
 
Entrepreneurial Enterprises 
Telemarketers deal not only in machinery-oriented scams like those above. The raising of 
exotic animals like ostriches and emus for luxury items and for slaughter has been a popular 
scam for a while, including weekend retreats to a model farm for would-be ranchers. In the 
last 10 years, the 900 telephone number service has been used to swindle those who set out 
to be swindlers themselves. People are convinced they can make a fortune charging between 
$3 and $10 a minute for recorded messages providing entertainment, psychic readings, or 
information available for free from other sources. 
 
Scams involving computer technology are usually successful due to the layman’s lack of 
knowledge in that field. Although around 80 percent of American households own some 
type of computer, few actually understand the intricate details of how computers function. 
Whatever the nature of the opportunity, there are signs that indicate that it is not legitimate. 
Among the most common: 
• Classified ads urging the prospect to call an 800 number. 
• Wild, unsubstantiated claims about potential earnings. 
• Promises about exclusive territories, assurances about good locations, or the assistance 
of a professional locator. 
• References specified by the company. 
  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1718                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The lack of a complete disclosure document containing information about the 
promoter’s experience, lawsuit history, audited financial statements, and substantiation 
for earnings assertions. 
 
Inventions Schemes 
In order to crack down on operations that offer fraudulent invention promotions, the FTC 
recently launched “Project Mousetrap.” Using ads, these operations solicit inventors to 
submit their product ideas to the promotions firm, which supposedly specializes in bringing 
new products to the market. Inventions are supposedly evaluated and appraised, and nearly 
always endorsed. The firm offers to submit the product to manufacturers for a fee.  
 
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission charged the American Institute for Research and 
Development, Inc. (AIRD) and its predecessor, American Inventors Corporation (AIC), 
with running a deceptive inventions-promotion scheme that bilked consumers nationwide 
out of thousands of dollars each over a 20-year time span. Promoters used print ads, in-
 person, and telephone sales presentations to offer two basic services: (1) a “feasibility 
report,” priced from $250 to $495, to evaluate the patentability and marketability of the 
inventor’s product, and (2) a “representation ag reement” that promised to prepare, file, and 
prosecute a patent application, and to promote the product to industry representatives. The 
representation agreement cost from $5,490 to $11,990. The complaint alleged that the firms 
obtained design patents, which have little or no commercial value, instead of the utility 
patents they promised. Furthermore, people were told that only a select few inventions were 
accepted, when virtually every person who applied was brought into the program. AIRD and 
AIC also encouraged their customers to expect huge financial gains when, the Trade 
Commission charged, “in 20 years of business, perhaps no more than 13 customers have 
realized any financial gain at all” as a result of the companies’ services. 
 
Victims received a useless recommendation for their product and a coding from the U.S. 
Bureau of Standard Industrial Code (SIC). The code generates a list of manufacturers who 
make products similar to the inventors,’ but regulators say the “lists of manufacturers that 
come from classifying your idea with the SIC usually are of limited value.” Some victims 
thought they were securing a patent in their promotions deal, but instead received only a 
Disclosure Document from the U.S. Patent Office, available to the general public for $10. 
The document is not a patent but a statement of “evidence of the date of conception of the 
invention” and does not guarantee rights to any future products. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1719 
Employment Services 
The phony employment service is similar in nature to the biz op. Preying on the 
unemployed, these scams promise good jobs, many of them overseas with the added 
enticement of tax-free wages. Victims pay bet ween $250 and $1,000 for the service. Some 
get lists of government jobs, which are usually available for free, or listings from classified 
ads. Most get nothing.  
 
Credit Services 
The simplest credit scam promises that the company will secure a loan for the applicant, 
regardless of credit history and references, if the person pays an upfront fee, usually between 
$35 and $75. Checking account debits are a favorite payment method, as are 900 numbers, 
which charge by the minute (up to $40 or $50 per call) to hear information widely available 
that provides no help in swaying a loan for the listener. Usually there are few or no loans 
made. Occasionally, loan information and applications may be mailed out to the victim, but 
usually, after the fee has been paid, the operators are not heard from again.  
 
Credit Repair Scams 
Similar to loan scams are those that promise to repair credit. Pitch men like to say they can 
“wipe away” or “doctor” or “cosmeticize” blotches on credit, insinuating they have ways of 
changing or disguising a person’s credit history. Despite the fact that there is really no way to 
erase bad credit, many people fall for this scam, paying hundreds of dollars to expunge  
their records.  
 
Prime-Rate Credit Cards 
In this scam, telemarketing companies assure customers they can get major cards for a small 
fee even if their credit report is poor. Victims receive an application for a MasterCard, which 
they could obtain in any department store. Telemarketers also push secured cards, which 
require a cash deposit (usually a $250–$300 minimum) to the issuer’s bank to activate  
the card. 
 
Gold Cards  
A relatively new credit card sting on the Internet touts “gold card” status for customers, 
regardless of credit history. The advertisement claims applicants will be processed for a 
major credit card. In actuality, applicants are merely assisted in filing an application for a 
major credit card, a worthless service since applications are quite simple to complete and 
submit. For a large up-front fee, participants receive a “catalog card,” which is only 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1720                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
redeemable if the holder buys the company’s over-priced, low-quality merchandise listed in 
the catalog as discounted for cardholders. Even then, an actual purchase may require paying 
additional fees or cash deposits before the customer is allowed to charge the remainder. 
Since the issuers do not report payment activity to any of the credit reporting bureaus, using 
the card does not improve the customer’s credit rating. 
 
Lotteries/Lottery Clubs 
Consumers receive a false claim that they have won, or can get help to win, a lottery, often in 
a foreign country. Most lottery scams are perpetrated by con artists in other countries, 
sometimes using U.S. addresses to disguise their real locations. Sometimes the lottery 
actually exists, but invitations to play don’t come from governments that operate legitimate 
lotteries or anyone connected to them. The consumer has no way of assuring that they will 
receive the tickets that they pay for or, in the unlikely event that they do win, will ever be 
able to collect their money. Potential victims need to remember that it is illegal to use the 
mail or telephone to play lotteries across borders; U.S. law prohibits it, not only across 
national borders but state lines as well. The consumer could be accused of illegal activities 
just by participating. Differences in legal systems, difficulties of conducting investigations in 
other countries, and expenses and other complications involved in pursuing cross-border 
fraud make the chances of a consumer getting his money back very, very slim. 
 
Buyers Clubs 
This scheme involves membership in discount buying clubs that consumers never agreed to 
join or were signed up for through free-trial offers. Consumers should beware of 
advertisements for products at incredibly cheap prices or free if the consumer pays for 
shipping, these offers may be designed to lure the consumer into a buyer’s club membership. 
Another way to avoid being a victim of a buyer’s club scheme is to understand how a “trial-
 offer” works. In many cases, the consumer will automatically be charged for a membership 
when the free-trial expires unless they contact the club to cancel. The consumer should  
ask for the details of all membership offers in writing before they agree to join. If 
unauthorized charges or debits are noticed on monthly statements, the consumer should 
contact their credit card issuer or bank and ask for their account to be credited for these 
unauthorized charges. 
 
Travel/Vacation Schemes 
Offers of free or discount travel that never materializes. Consumers need to be skeptical of 
offers for “free” trips. Airlines and other well-known companies sometimes operate contests 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1721 
for travel prizes; however, there are also companies that offer “free” trips to try to lure 
people into buying their products or services. Consumers also need to know what is included 
with the trip; a “free” or incredibly cheap trip may have hidden costs. For instance, the 
cruise may be free, but the consumer has to pay to fly to the departure point and stay in a 
hotel at their own expense. Or they may have to endure a long, high-pressure sales pitch for 
a timeshare or travel club membership as part of the trip. Often the best travel deals are only 
available for off-peak times, not during school vacations, holidays, or other popular  
travel dates.  
 
To avoid being victims of travel/vacation schemes, consumers should confirm all travel 
arrangements. If transportation and hotel are included in the travel package, ask how to 
contact those companies and confirm with them directly that the reservations have been 
made. Consumers should do their own travel research; it’s easy to get information from a 
local travel agent or other sources such as newspapers, books, and the Internet. When 
making travel arrangements, it is advisable to pay with a credit card. Fraudulent travel 
operators can take a consumer’s money and run and even legitimate companies can go out 
of business. Paying with a credit card allows the consumer to dispute the charges if the 
promises that are made are not kept. 
 
Slamming 
Slamming occurs when a consumer’s telephone or electric service is switched from their 
current company to another one without their permission. Long distance is the most 
common target of telephone slamming, but it can also happen with local or local-toll service. 
Consumers should read the fine print on all contest entry forms, coupons, and other 
promotional materials as these might include an agreement to switch phone service. Federal 
law requires that written agreements to change phone service must be separate documents, 
not part of a prize package or other materials. If the company offers a check for the 
consumer to switch, the check must clearly state on the front and on the back, in the 
signature area, that the consumer is agreeing to change their service.  
 
Consumers should always check their phone bills carefully. If the consumer notices a new 
company name, he should call the number that’s  listed on that portion of the bill and ask for 
an explanation. If he has been slammed, he should inform the company that he did not agree 
to use its service. He should then contact his original phone company and ask to be 
reinstated to his old calling plan. Under federal law, the consumer can switch back for free 
and they don’t have to pay for the first 30 days of service from the slammer. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1722                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Real Estate 
Real estate scams are easily recognized. There is almost always an element of time pressure, 
with the victims being convinced they are participating in a “once-in-a-lifetime, now-or-
 never” deal. The investors are led to believe there is no time to investigate the venture, and 
that if they hesitate, they will miss the opportunity to make a fortune. Promises of big profits 
for little or no involvement are the norm in real estate scams. The investor is also misled into 
assuming they are being let in on a special offer or an exclusive deal by the promoter. 
 
Since the 1920s, when thousands of Americans bought swampland in Florida, real estate has 
served as a conduit for fraud. A modern-day variation has dispensed with the actual land 
entirely and simply sells information. Companies tout the riches available in real estate 
through seminars and books that claim to offer secret ways to cash in. The customer pays 
for the secret info and gets worthless tips in return.  
 
Timeshares 
Another scam sells timeshares in condominiums for vacationers. Telemarketers pass 
themselves off as brokers to condominium owners and purport to specialize in selling 
timeshares.  
 
OPTIONS 
Ads in the real estate section of newspapers coax investors into buying “options” on 
property. Supposedly, the option locks in a present-day price on behalf of the purchaser, 
who can exercise the option later if he wishes to buy the land or to sell it at a profit. 
Sometimes the investor has bought nothing but a piece of paper — the “agent” has no 
authority to make deals on the property. Occasionally, the option is only valid for a few 
months, or is too vaguely worded to be enforceable. Usually there is an actual plot of land, 
but in most instances it is undevelopable due to location or zoning restrictions, and is 
therefore worthless. 
  
DEVELOPED PROPERTY  
The General Development Corporation of Florida ran a legendary land fraud scam in which 
potential investors were shown lots and houses guaranteed to make them rich. In this 
rendering of the “buy-and-fly” sham, victims were shepherded, and their contracts restricted, 
until they signed a deal for a lot. The scam continued for approximately six years and cost 
victims millions. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1723 
Art/Rare Items 
Land deals prey on the public’s reverence for real estate. The con who deals in art objects 
preys on a similar impulse — the reverence for the rare. Paintings worth little more than their 
canvas and oil are tagged as “masterpieces” sure to grow in value. The victims who fall for 
these scams are art novices who seem to unquestioningly believe the “dealer’s” appraisal of 
the objet d’art. 
 
This sort of willing victim will buy lithographic prints, mass-produced by the thousands, 
thinking they are purchasing a “limited edition.” Any anxieties the victims may develop are 
calmed by a promised 30-day no obligation trial and with “certificates of authenticity.” 
According to the FTC, the most popular artists to counterfeit are Salvador Dali, Pablo 
Picasso, Marc Chagall, and Joan Miro. 
  
Collectibles and Memorabilia 
Collectibles and household decorative items such as vases, bric-a-brac, and figurines are also 
commonly hawked by telemarketers. Again, these supposedly valuable objects are nothing 
more than cheap, shoddy merchandise. War memorabilia is especially popular, particularly 
items related to the World War II. Documents and keepsakes from any bygone era are on 
the fraudulent telemarketer’s best-seller list. Stamps are sold as rare when they are in  
fact worthless.  
 
Coins are another prime money-maker for telemarketers. “Certificates of authenticity” and 
“appraisals” are included with the merchandise to reassure customers, but needless to  
say these documents are usually produced by the sales company, or doctored from a 
legitimate original. 
 
Precious Stones 
Gems are generally regarded as items that will not lose their value. Telescammers exploit this 
mindset by offering “high-quality” gems for wholesale prices. Customers are told they are 
being offered a special deal due to fluctuations in the market or because their names are on 
an industry list.  
 
The risk is minimal, victims are told. By acquiring the stones wholesale, the individual 
minimizes the investment exposure. The company even offers its own “brokerage” services, 
which can liquidate the stones at a moment’s notice should the investor need the cash back 
quickly. The stones not only have a grading certificate and appraisal documents, but are also 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1724                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
sealed in a plastic wrapper to guarantee that their condition remains flawless. The real 
purpose of the seal — which victims are told must not be broken if the gems are ever to be 
offered for sale — is to keep buyers from making a genuine inspection of the article.  
 
Once a victim makes a buy, a company spokesperson calls a second time, saying that if the 
person buys more stones, his “gemstone portfo lio” will be more attractive to prospective 
buyers and at auctions advertised in company literature. If the victim buys additional items, a 
company broker will inevitably call with “good news.” The brokerage will have found a 
buyer for the victim’s holdings, but before the transaction can go through, the customer 
must pay some “minor fees.” These may be passed off as finders’ fees, brokers’ 
commissions, examination fees, international duties, or taxes. There may be a provision 
requiring the victim to buy more stones before making the sale. 
 
A variation on the scheme targets those who have already bought gems from telemarketers 
and whose names are taken from insider lists. The caller claims to be a broker representing 
an “overseas buyer” ready to purchase the listener’s portfolio. But, invariably, the buyer must 
have a few more stones in the portfolio—which the caller offers to supply—in order to 
make the sale, and there are fees and commissions to be paid. 
  
Precious Metals 
The precious metals market has traditionally been one of wide variances. Prices fluctuate 
constantly and even experts have trouble deciding what the next trend will be. Telemarketing 
operations play on this instability with offerings of gold, silver, and platinum. Once again, 
victims are told prices will never be this good again and that if they hesitate, they will miss a 
singular opportunity to make a fortune. 
 
900 Numbers/800 Numbers/International Calls 
900 numbers are usually associated with psychic hotlines, phone sex lines, and other dubious 
enterprises. Using 900 numbers, customers can “dial a prayer” or even listen to the Easter 
Bunny. Some callers insist they did not know they were being charged for the service. By 
using a toll-free 800 number that then links the caller to the per-minute charges, promoters 
are able to surreptitiously begin charging customers for calls. 800 numbers are often used as 
a front in telemarketing operations to lead consumers to think that a call is free, when in fact 
there are hidden charges everywhere. A particularly vicious combination uses a toll-free 
number to make a presentation about communication services. Once the caller dials in, the 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1725 
computerized service automatically puts a monthly charge, sometimes labeled “voicemail,” 
on the caller’s phone bill.  
  
Many operations familiar to law enforcement as  traditional boiler rooms moved into the toll 
numbers when they became widely available in the 1980s. Victims dial in, thinking they will 
receive information on claiming funds from abandoned bank accounts or inheritances from 
long lost relatives. Credit repair offers and advance-fee loan services use 900 numbers 
extensively. Sweepstakes and prize give-aways are promoted this way, as are employment 
services, real estate education, information on government programs and auctions, and biz 
ops of every kind. The latest ruse uses a 900 number to convince people to invest in the 900 
number business.  
 
International Calls 
An off-shore version of the 900 number scam uses international phone companies to reap 
big dollars. Callers believe they are dialing an international number for free information, 
usually about travel contests, discount fares, or overseas jobs. But the phone numbers, in 
Guyana and the Caribbean, charge up to $2.30 per minute for a recorded message that runs 
for 15 minutes. The promoters get a kickback from the phone company; in one case, 37 
cents per minute went to the scammers.  
 
Selling Free Information 
Companies involved in this kind of scheme take out ads in newspapers and magazines, or 
buy spots on talk radio, promising they can locate government jobs, get deals on liquidated 
equipment, or find student loans. All this information is available cheaply or free to the 
public, through government offices, on the Internet, and from other sources. One need only 
know where to look.  
  
Scholarship Services 
Maybe the most widely broadcast offering in the info racket is the college scholarship locator 
service. Student Aid Inc., a New York city firm, provides an example. SAI guaranteed 
students and their parents that for a $97 fee they would receive at least $1,000 in 
scholarships or grants. “In reality,” government  prosecutors showed, “the defendants almost 
never obtained scholarship money for consumers.” SAI used a common clause in its 
contracts to keep from paying refunds “requiring students [to] produce letters of rejection 
from every scholarship on their search list even though the list included scholarships whose 
deadlines had passed or for which the students did not qualify.”  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1726                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Whatever information scholarship services do provide is available for little or nothing (at 
most, a $5 or $10 fee) from legitimate institutions. The perpetrators imply that they have 
insider connections, or that they actually administer the dispersal of monies, when in reality 
they merely provide lists of scholarships offered by foundations and universities. 
  
In most cases, information scams sell freely available material. There is also a version that 
does offer the information for free but sticks a charge on anyway. The International Call 
scam promises “free information” on travel contests and discount fares. The information 
itself does not cost anything, but the call to get it costs from $3 to $6 a minute for a 15-
 minute call.  
 
Charity Fronts  
An increasing number of groups calling themselves non-profit, charitable concerns are not 
what they appear. Very little or no money goes to the advertised cause. Police and firemen’s 
associations have in some cases lent their names to telemarketing fund drives that only give 
about 35 percent of their collections to the group. Some boiler room operators claim to call 
for these groups—or for drives against a dise ase or underprivileged children—when they are 
in no way affiliated with the charity.  
  
A twist to this scam is the impersonation of handicapped workers by boiler room operators. 
Phone pros call victims, claiming to be handicapped or disabled, and attempt to sell light 
bulbs and other household products. The merchandise is priced at three times its actual 
value. The money is, of course, pocketed by the operators. 
 
Door-to-Door Promotions 
Sweepstakes promoters using a charity front offer the possibility of new cars and cash prizes 
to contributors. The raffle approach — tying the number of “chances” to a set amount —
helps drive up how much the victim is willing to give. A favored device of phony charities is 
to send school-age children door-to-door, saying they are raising money for antidrug 
programs or for a group that takes underprivileged kids on trips. Some of the children repeat 
what they are told in exchange for a few dollars. Others believe they will receive rewards and 
free trips when in fact they, too, are being scammed.  
 
Prizes, Sweepstakes, Discount Services 
The most common give-away is known as the “1-in-5.” A postcard arrives in the mail telling 
the receiver they have already won a prize. A new luxury vehicle tops the list, along with 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1727 
$5,000 in cash, a diamond necklace, a living room set, and $500 in gift certificates for 
clothing and household furnishings. The odds of winning any of the prizes are astronomical. 
Victims are given trinkets or coupons redeemable only for the company’s own  
shoddy merchandise. 
 
Winners who call back are often asked to stipulate how they intend to spend their winnings 
for the company’s “records,” or for “publicity materials.” Then they will be asked to pay a 
processing fee or to prepay the taxes on their winnings. Sometimes winners pay immediately 
by dialing a 900 number that charges them for a 10-minute call even if they hang up 
immediately. This practice is a further violation of telemarketing laws, which require a toll 
number to disconnect within 30 seconds after the caller hangs up.  
 
Magazine Subscriptions 
A productive front for prize hawkers is the magazine subscription service. Prepaid 
subscription offers extract money from customers through credit cards and bank debits, 
then never deliver the publication. In other instances, the processing fees far exceed the 
actual value of the subscriptions.  
  
Office and Household Supplies 
A scam that has recently become prevalent involves copy machine toner. An invoice for 
toner is sent to a company. The cons have usually called beforehand, gotten the name of the 
employee in charge of supplies, and addressed the invoice to that person. Although the 
office never ordered or received any toner, the con men are relying on poor communication 
to cover their ruse. The invoice will most likely be sent to the accounting department and 
paid. If the proper controls are in place at every level of business operations, this scheme 
should be detected. Too many businesses, however, are vulnerable to this kind of scam. 
 
The caller may get the company’s representative to accept a trial or promotional shipping of 
the product. He may claim to be a supplier for the company or a new salesman from a 
regular supplier. The product arrives and an invoice follows a couple of weeks later. If the 
company tries to send the product back, it is returned to them. To avoid further 
complications, the company will normally pay the bill just to put an end to the situation. 
 
Any sort of office supply, from paper to shelving to cleaning products, can be part of a 
scam. Medical supplies shipped to doctor’s offices and clinics are pushed in a similar fashion. 
Individual households can be the target of these ploys, as well. Water purifiers are often used 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1728                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in tandem with giveaway offers; the victim buys a filtering device, at an inflated cost, in order 
to qualify for the giveaway. Pyramid-style operations often use household products and 
health-related merchandise, such as vitamins or skin cream, as part of their machinations. 
 
Phishing 
Phishing is a popular scheme that involves tricking businesses or individuals into providing 
passwords, account numbers, or other sensitive data by claiming to be from an actual 
company the victim does business with. A solicitation for information appears to come from 
a legitimate business and can occur over the phone (such as a call from the victim’s “bank” 
saying their account has been compromised and requesting PIN numbers, account numbers, 
or passwords), or via e-mail (which is the most common technique). An individual receives 
an e-mail that appears to come from eBay, PayPal, or a financial institution. The e-mail states 
that the customer must immediately log into his account in order to update his information. 
The link directs the individual to a fake site that captures his identifying information such as 
Social Security numbers and PIN, mothers’ maiden name, and financial account numbers. 
 
It is crucial for people to recognize phishing so that they don’t fall victim to it:  
• Phishing occurs mostly by e-mail. As described above, the sender of the e-mail pretends 
to be a legitimate bank, government agency, or retailer and asks the recipient to confirm 
his personal information for any of these or other made-up reasons: the person’s 
account will be closed if they don’t give the information, an order has been placed in 
their name, or their information has been lost because of a computer glitch. Don’t ever 
respond to these e-mails. Legitimate banks, government agencies, and retailers would not 
e-mail you for your password of other identifying information.  
• Do not click on any link in an e-mail that asks for your personal information. The links 
included in the e-mails sent by phishers will take you to a phony website that looks just 
like the website of the real company or agency. If you followed the instructions, you 
would enter your personal information, which would go straight into the hands of 
identity thieves.  
• Ironically, phishers may even say that they are from the fraud departments of popular 
companies and ask you to verify your information because they suspect you may be a 
victim of identity theft. Other tactics include the phisher claiming to be from a state 
lottery commission who requests people’s banking information to deposit their 
“winnings” in their accounts. Again, never disclose any personal information via e-mail. 
• Phishing can also happen by phone. Verify caller’s identity and contact their company 
for legitimacy. Instead of fraudsters sending spam, they might call you and pretend to be 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1729 
from a company or government agency, making the same kinds of false claims and 
asking for your personal information. If someone contacts you and says that you have 
been a victim of fraud, verify the person’s identity before you provide any personal 
information. Legitimate credit card issuers and other companies may contact you if there 
is an unusual pattern indicating that someone else might be using one of your accounts. 
However, they only ask if you made particular transactions; they don’t request your 
account number or other personal information. Law enforcement agencies might also 
contact you if you’ve been the victim of fraud. To be on the safe side, ask for the 
person’s name, the name of the agency or  company, the telephone number, and the 
address. Then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitimate. 
• Phishers also target people who list themselves on job search sites. They pretend to be 
potential employers and ask for your Social Security number and other personal 
information. Before giving anyone your personal information, follow the above advice 
and make sure to verify the person’s identity. 
• Be suspicious if contacted unexpectedly and asked for your personal information. It is 
difficult to determine a company’s legitimacy by  reading an e-mail, going to a website, or 
talking to someone on the phone. If you’re contacted unexpectedly and asked to give out 
your personal information, a red flag should go up that something is “phishy.” 
Legitimate companies and agencies do not operate this way. 
• Act immediately if you’ve been hooked by a phisher. If you provided account numbers, 
PINs, or passwords to a phisher, notify the companies with whom you have the 
accounts right away. For information about how to put a “fraud alert” on your files at 
the credit reporting bureaus and other advice for ID theft victims, contact the Federal 
Trade Commission’s ID Theft Clearinghouse, www.consumer.gov/idtheft or toll-free, 
877-438-4338.  
 
SMiShing or Tishing  
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message via 
SMS (the protocol used to used transmit text mess ages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen  as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take  
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1730                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Voice Phishing or Vishing 
Vishing is a form of phishing attack where e-mails, for one reason or another, direct 
recipients to dial a 1-800 number, where an automated recording requests that callers enter 
personal information using a touch-tone phone.  
 
Pharming
Pharming is an attack in which a user is fooled into entering sensitive data (such as a 
password or credit card number) into a malicious website that impersonates a legitimate 
website. It is different from phishing in that the attacker does not have to rely on having the 
user click on a link in the e-mail to direct him to the fake website. Pharming actually exploits 
a vulnerability in the DNS server software that allows a hacker to acquire the domain name 
for a site and redirect the website traffic from a legitimate site to a false one. So even though 
the user types in the correct website address, the pharming program sends the user to an 
illegitimate site that looks like the real thing. Unknowingly, the user is then providing 
passwords and information directly to the hacker. 
 
Recovery Rooms 
Recovery room operations target those who have already lost money to a telemarketing 
scam. Posing as a consumer advocacy group or a law firm, telemarketers offer victims a 
chance to recover any funds they may have lost and bring the perpetrators to justice. Once 
the victim agrees, legal, investigative, and other fees will begin to emerge.  
 
 



:


telemarket fraud
2008 top 10 fraud
2009 top 10 fraud
fake check scam 61 fake check scam 52
prizessweepstak 12 prizessweepstak 21
phish 105 phish 13
advanc fee loanscredit arrang 2 internet gener merchandis 3
lotterieslotteri ticket club 2 scholarshipseduc grant 1
internet gener merchandis 15 advanc fee loanscredit arrang 1
magazin 15 magazin sale 1
scholarshipseduc grant 1 lotterieslotteri ticket club 1
offic ad spacedirectori list ing 1 telephon cram 5
credit card issu 5 busi opportunitiesfranchis 5
telemarket terminolog
term in the scammer vocabulari includ bang or nail the custom in other word
close the deal a salesperson most effect skill is puf the abil to sound convinc
while exagger the valu of a busi opportun or gift to make the puf more
persuas market hire singer or crier to tell potenti victim what a great deal thei ar
get call from angri custom who realiz thei have been swindl ar known as heat
call these ar handl by someon claim to be the compani manag or vicepresid
boiler room staff
work in a boiler room is share by fronter closer and verifi
fronter
the fronter call victim and make the initi pitch thi lowlevel worker is usual
break into the busi and read from a script to the prospect custom fronter
seldom see the merchandis or know the full extent of the oper keep fronter in
the dark at least in theori limit what thei can tell investig and protect them in the
event of prosecut
closer
the closer is a veteran fronter pass an interest caller to their closer identifi as the
firm manag who convinc the person to bui
consum fraud financi transact
11710 2011 fraud examin manual
verifi
next the caller is pass to a verifi who read some vagu word about the deal and
record the person agreement these record ar intention vagu leav out the
pitch and kei detail essenti record onli the custom consent verifi also stall
custom who call back to complain heat call find reason why a littl more patienc
will solv the problem and in some case convinc the person to send a littl more monei
to help the process along
staff exploit
the custom of fraudul telemarket oper ar not the onli victim fronter ar
often poorli educ and easili taken advantag of by the career crimin who run the
oper salespeopl mai face hidden cost in a work agreement similar to the on
involv in the item thei push on unsuspect custom for exampl boiler room
oper hold back part of their phone list and sell them to crew member as hot lead
telescam veteran know how to oper a gift sting that bilk both the custom and the
salesperson oper overst the retail valu of the gift so the custom get less than
thei paid for then by give agent an inflat wholesal cost the oper can pai these
worker less commiss which is figur on the profit margin between wholesal
and retail
the salespeopl in boiler room ar sometim as desper as their victim most ar
unemploi with littl educ or market skill telemarket promis easi work
and big pai without ani experi mani pe opl who start out as fronter howev ar
serv an apprenticeship in their crimin career thei ar woo with car cellular
phone and other perk former worker have report that supervisor sprinkl line of
cocain along the phone bank tabl and threw hand of monei into the air promis the
proce to whoever made the next sale
natur there ar no social secur or payrol tax deduct from paycheck so
employe can ow big tax bill at the end of the year fronter commiss payment ar
often short or withheld paycheck frequent fail to clear the bank owner promis big
profit share for a month or two then shut down the busi thei tell the worker that
their asset have been frozen by creditor or regul worker lose their job and usual
their last week commiss for the last few month howev the owner have been
take in 25000 to 30000 a week
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11711
telemarket supplier
the telemarket industri reli on a number of sourc to suppli it phone script mail
list merchandis phone bank and autodial mail list and phone list ar sold for a
few cent per name list of peopl who have been stung befor or who have bad credit
record fetch between 10 and fifteen cent per name by suppli telemarket with the
tool of their trade these compani make telescam possibl mani of the supplier ar
awar of telemarket crimin intent and choos to ignor them
turnkei
turnkei compris an industri of their own by provid the collater a telemarket scam
need turnkei launder credit card receipt and check sell autodial and phone list and
provid the merchandis portrai as valuabl prize
legitim busi howev ar routin implic in thi scurril industri the us
postal servic for instanc carri ton of telemarket ad in the earli dai of the
industri telemarket us the postal servic to deliv merchandis cod but when the
postal servic mount an aggress campaign against fraud compani turn to credit
card bill to avoid the scrutini thei also us parcel deliveri servic or overnight
which ar not subject to feder mail fraud law by keep the valu of the merchandis
just below 300 telemarket avoid the minimum amount at which postal inspector ar
requir to investig fraud
independ servic organ
telemarket often have difficulti secur credit card servic from reput institut
mani bank will not open creditprocess a ccount for busi who do a substanti
amount of their busi in phone sale becaus these account typic incur a high rate of
chargeback feder law give consum 60 dai to protest charg to their card and if
success the issuer ha to absorb the loss mastercard and visa estim their loss from
phone fraud at 300 million a year
telemarket oper have learn the difficulti thei face when deal directli with
bank to circumv thi obstacl phone sale compani hire independ servic
organ which approach bank on the telemarket behalf the servic compani
agre with the bank to cover ani chargeback from the oper the telemarket is
requir to post a larg bond to cover potenti loss so the servic organ is also
protect from loss howev even with a halfmillion dollar bond the reserv fund can be
consum fraud financi transact
11712 2011 fraud examin manual
quickli deplet when custom start to realiz thei have been swindl leav the servic
compani andor the bank with enorm loss
factor compani
telemarket oper also commonli engag factor compani these group bui
credit card receipt from telemarket concern at a discount then us their merchant bank
account to convert the receipt into cash some factor charg as much as 30 percent of the
receipt gross valu to launder the slip factor is illeg in some state though crook
find wai to slip through loophol or disguis their allianc
intern factor compani
factor through asian and european merchant is becom increasingli common
factor compani in these countri tend to charg a lower price for their servic than
some other countriesbetween nine and 10 percent of the gross regardless of their local
factor have the opportun to make a great profit thei also howev face the risk that
bank will freez their account or sue them for excess chargeback in respons to the
loss suffer at the hand of dishonest telemarket bank and credit card compani
have start review their account to locat those busi with inordin number of
chargeback the financi institut close these account and mai file suit if the account
holder can be locat
checkcash establish
anoth conveni tool at the telemarket dispos is the checkcash store if a boiler
room oper wish to avoid the risk of set up a bank account that might be trace
or seiz custom person check ar taken to a compani that cash them for a small
fee these establish rare requir ani identif to cash the check custom mai
complain and try to stop payment on their check but thei ar ordinarili too late
common telemarket scam
senior scam
older peopl ar the favorit prei of telescamm in the us thei make up 11 percent of
the popul but constitut 32 percent of the victim of consum fraud and 50 percent of
all phone scam victim fortyf percent of senior citizen have been offer invest
by a person unknown to them senior own more than half of all financi asset in the us
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11713
fred schult author of fleec relat the pitch deliv to an elderli woman in
philadelphia by tim oneil the woman told detect about the more than 10000 for
which oneil and hi lieuten swindl her oneil call to mollifi the woman protest
wa record by the fbi on the line he insist the collect the woman bought
includ actual bullet excav from the civil war ar genuin and valuabl
do you wear pendant thi is a beauti is a diamond im not gonna ask you to
spend a penni
how old ar you god bless you 89
were gonna get that out to you look for it in the middl of next week and then give
us a call and then let us know how you like it
well i hope i put a littl sunshin in your dai okai honei and god bless you oh dont
cry now were here to take care of you well be here and if you need to talk to anybodi
at ani time you give us a call okai bye bye and god bless you
telemarket usual call in the even nighttim call find peopl of everi ag in more
impuls mood senior mai be more vulner to pitch promis them extra monei
and luxuri good becaus mani live on fix incom these lotterystyl gambit can seem
like an easi wai for the elderli to improv their financi statu
target the unemploi
the unemploi ar anoth favorit target for sweepstak pitch and job search servic
wherea the system ha left the jobless without hope the telemarket offer a wai
around offici channel peopl with bad credit pai telemarket to repair their credit
record or get a major card instead thei get a list of bank that offer credit card commonli
publish in newspap or an applic for a card that requir a secur deposit for
activ usual sever hundr or a thousand dollar these peopl ar also target by
advancefe loan scam which promis loan in exchang for a fee
affin fraud
affin fraud target group of peopl who have some social connect neighborhood
chiefli popul by racial minor especi immigr group ar often the site of
affin fraud religi and profession ti ar often exploit market technolog ha
consum fraud financi transact
11714 2011 fraud examin manual
made it possibl for a compani to bui target list not just by locat but accord to
bui habit leisur time activ and club membership the most expens list carri
the name of peopl who have alreadi fallen for a telemarket scam thi is call reload
chief among telescamm trick is obfusc salespeopl read off list of prize
emphas bigticket item like jewelri and car not mention that the odd of actual
win anyth besid a trinket ar astronom schult relat an incid in which
victim were told thei had won a winnebago victim were ask to pai a handl fee of
2900 a fraction of the cost of a new travel home about two month later victim found a
deliveri driver at their door with a winnebago tent
some oper actual encourag their mark to call and check with the better busi
bureau bbb and with former custom give out the number for the person to call
these number ring at phoni line set up by the scammer who give out a glow
recommend phone room have been known to set up refer arm with titl like
the better busi bureau of america or intern better busi bureau to
recommend their ventur if a potenti victim doe reach the better busi bureau
chanc ar the report will contain littl or noth of us the inform in these file is
usual ambigu and out of date
consol
when irat custom call telemarket back to complain their call ar rout to
profession who placat the caller with more promis and obfusc some boiler
room have a prearrang commun rout for lead complaint through four or five
differ depart thi tactic caus mani caller to eventu hang up without
have spoken to anyon in some instanc telemarket confront with furiou caller
threaten legal action do award someth of valu to the custom though the item is
usual worth far less than the person ha paid
if obfusc and consol prize fail to appeas the caller the con turn to threat and
intimid thi is a favorit method for deal with senior citizen especi elderli
women threat ar us not just to keep custom from file complaint but to cajol
more monei out of them some telemarket have actual threaten caller person
safeti if thei refus to pai
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11715
the odd in favor of catch a boiler room oper in progress ar usual poor
oper can select a town set up a room make their haul and leav again in a matter of
week or month when author raid a boiler room the oper ha typic alreadi
move on if the compani owner regist with state regul thei probabl did so
under an alia by the time polic arriv the perpetr have move on and the chanc of
find them ar slim
800 number
tollfre 800 number or other tollfre prefix such as 866 877 or 888 offer by
phone servic compani ar us by some oper the scam is a tollfre line
advertis in mailer flier and newspap ad to lure victim into make the call
themselv the tollfre number usual carri a record that direct custom to a 900
number that charg the caller between 3 and 10 a minut to hear record messag a
favorit devic of seller is to insist that the offer be made is good for less than 48 hour
to secur the opportun the custom hand over a cashier check to an overnightdeliveri
servic even if the victim doe have second thought he will be unabl to stop
payment on a cashier check
automat debit
the person check account is on of the most conveni tool for defraud
telemarket custom thank to advanc in electron bank technolog us
computer transfer busi can set up an automat debit to the buyer account
telemarket oper us thi devic to obtain payment befor victim can chang their
mind about their purchas wors telemarket can simpli us the inform to drain
the victim account thi inform is usua lly obtain by tell the victim that the
account number ar need to verifi elig for a giveawai or busi opportun
bank ar not respons for ani loss custom suffer in thi wai so there ar no
chargeback and littl recours for the swindl custom besid file a complaint even if
an investig of the complaint bring the scammer to court the chanc that the victim
will receiv restitut ar poor
busi opportun biz op
mani telemarket fraud ar aim at peopl start their own busi regul put
loss in fraudul busi opportun at over 100 million a year and most observ
think the number is far higher
consum fraud financi transact
11716 2011 fraud examin manual
workathom scheme
besid franchis offer and other miscellan busi scam the most preval fraud
involv workathom scheme and fccrelat invest victim of these phoni
offer do not see themselv as part of the telemarket prei thei believ thei ar
make a legitim busi invest
biz op promot often us a team approach in their enterpris the victim usual see an
ad and call a fronter who make the introductori pitch and then pass the victim to a
higherup next the caller is put through to a crier who endors the opportun and tell
the victim of the profit he made final a closer seal the deal and get the payment secur
as quickli as possibl
telemarket us businessrel term such as exclus territori annual gross revenu and
emerg market in these call thi help convinc the mark that the biz op is legitim a
loui harri poll found that 1 in 33 cold call for invest were success
some businesspitch oper ar complet fabric thei offer envelop stuf or
bookreview enterpris that do not realli exist scammer mail out postcard or bui cheap
ad in magazin and newspap some mai not even take ani phone call the ad
convinc the victim to send monei to a mailbox unlik the us postal servic which
requir identif from renter and divulg thi inform to anyon who inquir
privat compani will rent maildrop to anyon for a few dollar a month and can refus to
sai who paid for the box
fly and bui
some scam involv ventur such as vend machin pai phone and merchandis
displai rack thei often gain credibl by set up a front oper and invit
investor for tour thi part of the ruse is known as the fly and bui for exampl the
secur divis of the state of washington prosecut a case on behalf of a woman who
travel to colorado and met with a promot the promot offer to let her in on a deal
for video pool and video bowl game thrill with the demonstr and her tour
guid promis of quick profit she paid 13000 for machin that broke down in less
than three month when the woman complain to the promot about the shoddi of
the machin she wa sent two new on along with a bill
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11717
shoddi merchandis is a familiar element of the biz op scam the scam ar tailor for the
target audienc a maryland ring ran advertis in incom plu magazin and other
investorori public for a solarpow car batteri recharg in second your
off and run the ad claim the offer state that distributor were make over
200000 a year with the revolutionari devic but the machin were worthless on
investor took the recharg to an electrician and wa told it could recharg a batteri but that
it would take a few week
vend machin and pai phone scam
buyer ar promis exclus territori but find the same area ha been sold to mani
peopl often the machin do not work or thei simpli do not make ani monei sooner or
later the ruse is expos but in the short term the oper can make substanti proce
entrepreneuri enterpris
telemarket deal not onli in machineryori scam like those abov the rais of
exot anim like ostrich and emu for luxuri item and for slaughter ha been a popular
scam for a while includ weekend retreat to a model farm for wouldb rancher in the
last 10 year the 900 telephon number servic ha been us to swindl those who set out
to be swindler themselv peopl ar convinc thei can make a fortun charg between
3 and 10 a minut for record messag provid entertain psychic read or
inform avail for free from other sourc
scam involv comput technolog ar usual success due to the layman lack of
knowledg in that field although around 80 percent of american household own some
type of comput few actual understand the intric detail of how comput function
whatev the natur of the opportun there ar sign that indic that it is not legitim
among the most common
classifi ad urg the prospect to call an 800 number
wild unsubstanti claim about potenti earn
promis about exclus territori assur about good locat or the assist
of a profession locat
refer specifi by the compani
consum fraud financi transact
11718 2011 fraud examin manual
the lack of a complet disclosur document contain inform about the
promot experi lawsuit histori audit financi statement and substanti
for earn assert
invent scheme
in order to crack down on oper that offer fraudul invent promot the ftc
recent launch project mousetrap us ad these oper solicit inventor to
submit their product idea to the promot firm which supposedli special in bring
new product to the market invent ar supposedli evalu and apprais and nearli
alwai endors the firm offer to submit the product to manufactur for a fee
the us feder trade commiss charg the american institut for research and
develop inc aird and it predecessor american inventor corpor aic
with run a decept inventionspromot scheme that bilk consum nationwid
out of thousand of dollar each over a 20year time span promot us print ad in
person and telephon sale present to offer two basic servic 1 a feasibl
report price from 250 to 495 to evalu the patent and market of the
inventor product and 2 a represent ag reement that promis to prepar file and
prosecut a patent applic and to promot the product to industri repres the
represent agreement cost from 5490 to 11990 the complaint alleg that the firm
obtain design patent which have littl or no commerci valu instead of the util
patent thei promis furthermor peopl were told that onli a select few invent were
accept when virtual everi person who appli wa brought into the program aird and
aic also encourag their custom to expect huge financi gain when the trade
commiss charg in 20 year of busi perhap no more than 13 custom have
realiz ani financi gain at all as a result of the compani servic
victim receiv a useless recommend for their product and a code from the us
bureau of standard industri code sic the code gener a list of manufactur who
make product similar to the inventor but regul sai the list of manufactur that
come from classifi your idea with the sic usual ar of limit valu some victim
thought thei were secur a patent in their promot deal but instead receiv onli a
disclosur document from the us patent offic avail to the gener public for 10
the document is not a patent but a statement of evid of the date of concept of the
invent and doe not guarante right to ani futur product
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11719
employ servic
the phoni employ servic is similar in natur to the biz op prei on the
unemploi these scam promis good job mani of them oversea with the ad
entic of taxfre wage victim pai bet ween 250 and 1000 for the servic some
get list of govern job which ar usual avail for free or list from classifi
ad most get noth
credit servic
the simplest credit scam promis that the compani will secur a loan for the applic
regardless of credit histori and refer if the person pai an upfront fee usual between
35 and 75 check account debit ar a favorit payment method as ar 900 number
which charg by the minut up to 40 or 50 per call to hear inform wide avail
that provid no help in swai a loan for the listen usual there ar few or no loan
made occasion loan inform and applic mai be mail out to the victim but
usual after the fee ha been paid the oper ar not heard from again
credit repair scam
similar to loan scam ar those that promis to repair credit pitch men like to sai thei can
wipe awai or doctor or cosmetic blotch on credit insinu thei have wai of
chang or disguis a person credit histori despit the fact that there is realli no wai to
eras bad credit mani peopl fall for thi scam pai hundr of dollar to expung
their record
primer credit card
in thi scam telemarket compani assur custom thei can get major card for a small
fee even if their credit report is poor victim receiv an applic for a mastercard which
thei could obtain in ani depart store telemarket also push secur card which
requir a cash deposit usual a 250300 minimum to the issuer bank to activ
the card
gold card
a rel new credit card sting on the internet tout gold card statu for custom
regardless of credit histori the advertis claim applic will be process for a
major credit card in actual applic ar mere assist in file an applic for a
major credit card a worthless servic sinc applic ar quit simpl to complet and
submit for a larg upfront fee particip receiv a catalog card which is onli
consum fraud financi transact
11720 2011 fraud examin manual
redeem if the holder bui the compani overpr lowqual merchandis list in
the catalog as discount for cardhold even then an actual purchas mai requir pai
addit fee or cash deposit befor the custom is allow to charg the remaind
sinc the issuer do not report payment activ to ani of the credit report bureau us
the card doe not improv the custom credit rate
lotterieslotteri club
consum receiv a fals claim that thei have won or can get help to win a lotteri often in
a foreign countri most lotteri scam ar perpetr by con artist in other countri
sometim us us address to disguis their real locat sometim the lotteri
actual exist but invit to plai dont come from govern that oper legitim
lotteri or anyon connect to them the consum ha no wai of assur that thei will
receiv the ticket that thei pai for or in the unlik event that thei do win will ever be
abl to collect their monei potenti victim need to rememb that it is illeg to us the
mail or telephon to plai lotteri across border us law prohibit it not onli across
nation border but state line as well the consum could be accus of illeg activ
just by particip differ in legal system difficulti of conduct investig in
other countri and expens and other complic involv in pursu crossbord
fraud make the chanc of a consum get hi monei back veri veri slim
buyer club
thi scheme involv membership in discount bui club that consum never agre to
join or were sign up for through freetrial offer consum should bewar of
advertis for product at incred cheap price or free if the consum pai for
ship these offer mai be design to lure the consum into a buyer club membership
anoth wai to avoid be a victim of a buyer club scheme is to understand how a trial
offer work in mani case the consum will automat be charg for a membership
when the freetrial expir unless thei contact the club to cancel the consum should
ask for the detail of all membership offer in write befor thei agre to join if
unauthor charg or debit ar notic on monthli statement the consum should
contact their credit card issuer or bank and ask for their account to be credit for these
unauthor charg
travelvac scheme
offer of free or discount travel that never materi consum need to be skeptic of
offer for free trip airlin and other wellknown compani sometim oper contest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11721
for travel prize howev there ar also compani that offer free trip to try to lure
peopl into bui their product or servic consum also need to know what is includ
with the trip a free or incred cheap trip mai have hidden cost for instanc the
cruis mai be free but the consum ha to pai to fly to the departur point and stai in a
hotel at their own expens or thei mai have to endur a long highpressur sale pitch for
a timeshar or travel club membership as part of the trip often the best travel deal ar onli
avail for offpeak time not dure school vacat holidai or other popular
travel date
to avoid be victim of travelvac scheme consum should confirm all travel
arrang if transport and hotel ar includ in the travel packag ask how to
contact those compani and confirm with them directli that the reserv have been
made consum should do their own travel research it easi to get inform from a
local travel agent or other sourc such as newspap book and the internet when
make travel arrang it is advis to pai with a credit card fraudul travel
oper can take a consum monei and run and even legitim compani can go out
of busi pai with a credit card allow the consum to disput the charg if the
promis that ar made ar not kept
slam
slam occur when a consum telephon or electr servic is switch from their
current compani to anoth on without their permiss long distanc is the most
common target of telephon slam but it can also happen with local or localtol servic
consum should read the fine print on all contest entri form coupon and other
promot materi as these might includ an agreement to switch phone servic feder
law requir that written agreement to chang phone servic must be separ document
not part of a prize packag or other materi if the compani offer a check for the
consum to switch the check must clearli state on the front and on the back in the
signatur area that the consum is agre to chang their servic
consum should alwai check their phone bill carefulli if the consum notic a new
compani name he should call the number that list on that portion of the bill and ask for
an explan if he ha been slam he should inform the compani that he did not agre
to us it servic he should then contact hi origin phone compani and ask to be
reinstat to hi old call plan under feder law the consum can switch back for free
and thei dont have to pai for the first 30 dai of servic from the slammer
consum fraud financi transact
11722 2011 fraud examin manual
real estat
real estat scam ar easili recogn there is almost alwai an element of time pressur
with the victim be convinc thei ar particip in a onceinalifetim nowor
never deal the investor ar led to believ there is no time to investig the ventur and
that if thei hesit thei will miss the opportun to make a fortun promis of big profit
for littl or no involv ar the norm in real estat scam the investor is also misl into
assum thei ar be let in on a special offer or an exclus deal by the promot
sinc the 1920 when thousand of american bought swampland in florida real estat ha
serv as a conduit for fraud a moderndai variat ha dispens with the actual land
entir and simpli sell inform compani tout the rich avail in real estat
through seminar and book that claim to offer secret wai to cash in the custom pai
for the secret info and get worthless tip in return
timeshar
anoth scam sell timeshar in condominium for vacation telemarket pass
themselv off as broker to condominium owner and purport to special in sell
timeshar
option
ad in the real estat section of newspap coax investor into bui option on
properti supposedli the option lock in a presentdai price on behalf of the purchas
who can exercis the option later if he wish to bui the land or to sell it at a profit
sometim the investor ha bought noth but a piec of paper the agent ha no
author to make deal on the properti occasion the option is onli valid for a few
month or is too vagu word to be enforc usual there is an actual plot of land
but in most instanc it is undevelop due to locat or zone restrict and is
therefor worthless
develop properti
the gener develop corpor of florida ran a legendari land fraud scam in which
potenti investor were shown lot and hous guarante to make them rich in thi
render of the buyandfli sham victim were shepherd and their contract restrict
until thei sign a deal for a lot the scam continu for approxim six year and cost
victim million
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11723
artrar item
land deal prei on the public rever for real estat the con who deal in art object
prei on a similar impuls the rever for the rare paint worth littl more than their
canva and oil ar tag as masterpiec sure to grow in valu the victim who fall for
these scam ar art novic who seem to unquestioningli believ the dealer apprais of
the objet dart
thi sort of will victim will bui lithograph print massproduc by the thousand
think thei ar purchas a limit edit ani anxieti the victim mai develop ar
calm by a promis 30dai no oblig trial and with certif of authent
accord to the ftc the most popular artist to counterfeit ar salvador dali pablo
picasso marc chagal and joan miro
collect and memorabilia
collect and household decor item such as vase bricabrac and figurin ar also
commonli hawk by telemarket again these supposedli valuabl object ar noth
more than cheap shoddi merchandis war memorabilia is especi popular particularli
item relat to the world war ii document and keepsak from ani bygon era ar on
the fraudul telemarket bestsel list stamp ar sold as rare when thei ar in
fact worthless
coin ar anoth prime moneymak for telemarket certif of authent and
apprais ar includ with the merchandis to reassur custom but needless to
sai these document ar usual produc by the sale compani or doctor from a
legitim origin
preciou stone
gem ar gener regard as item that will not lose their valu telescamm exploit thi
mindset by offer highqual gem for wholesal price custom ar told thei ar
be offer a special deal due to fluctuat in the market or becaus their name ar on
an industri list
the risk is minim victim ar told by acquir the stone wholesal the individu
minim the invest exposur the compani even offer it own brokerag servic
which can liquid the stone at a moment notic should the investor need the cash back
quickli the stone not onli have a grade certif and apprais document but ar also
consum fraud financi transact
11724 2011 fraud examin manual
seal in a plastic wrapper to guarante that their condit remain flawless the real
purpos of the seal which victim ar told must not be broken if the gem ar ever to be
offer for sale is to keep buyer from make a genuin inspect of the articl
onc a victim make a bui a compani spokesperson call a second time sai that if the
person bui more stone hi gemston portfo lio will be more attract to prospect
buyer and at auction advertis in compani literatur if the victim bui addit item a
compani broker will inevit call with good new the brokerag will have found a
buyer for the victim hold but befor the transact can go through the custom
must pai some minor fee these mai be pass off as finder fee broker
commiss examin fee intern duti or tax there mai be a provis
requir the victim to bui more stone befor make the sale
a variat on the scheme target those who have alreadi bought gem from telemarket
and whose name ar taken from insid list the caller claim to be a broker repres
an oversea buyer readi to purchas the listen portfolio but invari the buyer must
have a few more stone in the portfoliowhich the caller offer to supplyin order to
make the sale and there ar fee and commiss to be paid
preciou metal
the preciou metal market ha tradition been on of wide varianc price fluctuat
constantli and even expert have troubl decid what the next trend will be telemarket
oper plai on thi instabl with offer of gold silver and platinum onc again
victim ar told price will never be thi good again and that if thei hesit thei will miss a
singular opportun to make a fortun
900 numbers800 numbersintern call
900 number ar usual associ with psychic hotlin phone sex line and other dubiou
enterpris us 900 number custom can dial a prayer or even listen to the easter
bunni some caller insist thei did not know thei were be charg for the servic by
us a tollfre 800 number that then link the caller to the perminut charg promot
ar abl to surreptiti begin charg custom for call 800 number ar often us as
a front in telemarket oper to lead consum to think that a call is free when in fact
there ar hidden charg everywher a particularli viciou combin us a tollfre
number to make a present about commun servic onc the caller dial in the
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11725
computer servic automat put a monthli charg sometim label voicemail
on the caller phone bill
mani oper familiar to law enforc as tradit boiler room move into the toll
number when thei becam wide avail in the 1980 victim dial in think thei will
receiv inform on claim fund from abandon bank account or inherit from
long lost rel credit repair offer and advancefe loan servic us 900 number
extens sweepstak and prize giveawai ar promot thi wai as ar employ
servic real estat educ inform on govern program and auction and biz
op of everi kind the latest ruse us a 900 number to convinc peopl to invest in the 900
number busi
intern call
an offshor version of the 900 number scam us intern phone compani to reap
big dollar caller believ thei ar dial an intern number for free inform
usual about travel contest discount fare or oversea job but the phone number in
guyana and the caribbean charg up to 230 per minut for a record messag that run
for 15 minut the promot get a kickback from the phone compani in on case 37
cent per minut went to the scammer
sell free inform
compani involv in thi kind of scheme take out ad in newspap and magazin or
bui spot on talk radio promis thei can locat govern job get deal on liquid
equip or find student loan all thi inform is avail cheapli or free to the
public through govern offic on the internet and from other sourc on need onli
know where to look
scholarship servic
mayb the most wide broadcast offer in the info racket is the colleg scholarship locat
servic student aid inc a new york citi firm provid an exampl sai guarante
student and their parent that for a 97 fee thei would receiv at least 1000 in
scholarship or grant in realiti govern prosecutor show the defend almost
never obtain scholarship monei for consum sai us a common claus in it
contract to keep from pai refund requir student to produc letter of reject
from everi scholarship on their search list even though the list includ scholarship whose
deadlin had pass or for which the student did not qualifi
consum fraud financi transact
11726 2011 fraud examin manual
whatev inform scholarship servic do provid is avail for littl or noth at
most a 5 or 10 fee from legitim institut the perpetr impli that thei have
insid connect or that thei actual administ the dispers of moni when in realiti
thei mere provid list of scholarship offer by foundat and univers
in most case inform scam sell freeli avail materi there is also a version that
doe offer the inform for free but stick a charg on anywai the intern call
scam promis free inform on travel contest and discount fare the inform
itself doe not cost anyth but the call to get it cost from 3 to 6 a minut for a 15
minut call
chariti front
an increas number of group call themselv nonprofit charit concern ar not
what thei appear veri littl or no monei goe to the advertis caus polic and firemen
associ have in some case lent their name to telemarket fund drive that onli give
about 35 percent of their collect to the group some boiler room oper claim to call
for these groupsor for drive against a dise as or underprivileg childrenwhen thei ar
in no wai affili with the chariti
a twist to thi scam is the imperson of handicap worker by boiler room oper
phone pro call victim claim to be handicap or disabl and attempt to sell light
bulb and other household product the merchandis is price at three time it actual
valu the monei is of cours pocket by the oper
doortodoor promot
sweepstak promot us a chariti front offer the possibl of new car and cash prize
to contributor the raffl approach ty the number of chanc to a set amount
help drive up how much the victim is will to give a favor devic of phoni chariti is
to send schoolag children doortodoor sai thei ar rais monei for antidrug
program or for a group that take underprivileg kid on trip some of the children repeat
what thei ar told in exchang for a few dollar other believ thei will receiv reward and
free trip when in fact thei too ar be scam
prize sweepstak discount servic
the most common giveawai is known as the 1in5 a postcard arriv in the mail tell
the receiv thei have alreadi won a prize a new luxuri vehicl top the list along with
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11727
5000 in cash a diamond necklac a live room set and 500 in gift certif for
cloth and household furnish the odd of win ani of the prize ar astronom
victim ar given trinket or coupon redeem onli for the compani own
shoddi merchandis
winner who call back ar often ask to stipul how thei intend to spend their win
for the compani record or for public materi then thei will be ask to pai a
process fee or to prepai the tax on their win sometim winner pai immedi
by dial a 900 number that charg them for a 10minut call even if thei hang up
immedi thi practic is a further violat of telemarket law which requir a toll
number to disconnect within 30 second after the caller hang up
magazin subscript
a product front for prize hawker is the magazin subscript servic prepaid
subscript offer extract monei from custom through credit card and bank debit
then never deliv the public in other instanc the process fee far exce the
actual valu of the subscript
offic and household suppli
a scam that ha recent becom preval involv copi machin toner an invoic for
toner is sent to a compani the con have usual call beforehand gotten the name of the
employe in charg of suppli and address the invoic to that person although the
offic never order or receiv ani toner the con men ar reli on poor commun
to cover their ruse the invoic will most like be sent to the account depart and
paid if the proper control ar in place at everi level of busi oper thi scheme
should be detect too mani busi howev ar vulner to thi kind of scam
the caller mai get the compani repres to accept a trial or promot ship of
the product he mai claim to be a supplier for the compani or a new salesman from a
regular supplier the product arriv and an invoic follow a coupl of week later if the
compani tri to send the product back it is return to them to avoid further
complic the compani will normal pai the bill just to put an end to the situat
ani sort of offic suppli from paper to shelv to clean product can be part of a
scam medic suppli ship to doctor offic and clinic ar push in a similar fashion
individu household can be the target of these ploi as well water purifi ar often us
consum fraud financi transact
11728 2011 fraud examin manual
in tandem with giveawai offer the victim bui a filter devic at an inflat cost in order
to qualifi for the giveawai pyramidstyl oper often us household product and
healthrel merchandis such as vitamin or skin cream as part of their machin
phish
phish is a popular scheme that involv trick busi or individu into provid
password account number or other sensit data by claim to be from an actual
compani the victim doe busi with a solicit for inform appear to come from
a legitim busi and can occur over the phone such as a call from the victim bank
sai their account ha been compromis and request pin number account number
or password or via email which is the most common techniqu an individu receiv
an email that appear to come from ebai paypal or a financi institut the email state
that the custom must immedi log into hi account in order to updat hi inform
the link direct the individu to a fake site that captur hi identifi inform such as
social secur number and pin mother maiden name and financi account number
it is crucial for peopl to recogn phish so that thei dont fall victim to it
phish occur mostli by email as describ abov the sender of the email pretend
to be a legitim bank govern agenc or retail and ask the recipi to confirm
hi person inform for ani of these or other madeup reason the person
account will be close if thei dont give the inform an order ha been place in
their name or their inform ha been lost becaus of a comput glitch dont ever
respond to these email legitim bank govern agenc and retail would not
email you for your password of other identifi inform
do not click on ani link in an email that ask for your person inform the link
includ in the email sent by phisher will take you to a phoni websit that look just
like the websit of the real compani or agenc if you follow the instruct you
would enter your person inform which would go straight into the hand of
ident thiev
iron phisher mai even sai that thei ar from the fraud depart of popular
compani and ask you to verifi your inform becaus thei suspect you mai be a
victim of ident theft other tactic includ the phisher claim to be from a state
lotteri commiss who request peopl bank inform to deposit their
win in their account again never disclos ani person inform via email
phish can also happen by phone verifi caller ident and contact their compani
for legitimaci instead of fraudster send spam thei might call you and pretend to be
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11729
from a compani or govern agenc make the same kind of fals claim and
ask for your person inform if someon contact you and sai that you have
been a victim of fraud verifi the person ident befor you provid ani person
inform legitim credit card issuer and other compani mai contact you if there
is an unusu pattern indic that someon els might be us on of your account
howev thei onli ask if you made particular transact thei dont request your
account number or other person inform law enforc agenc might also
contact you if youv been the victim of fraud to be on the safe side ask for the
person name the name of the agenc or compani the telephon number and the
address then get the main number and call to find out if the person is legitim
phisher also target peopl who list themselv on job search site thei pretend to be
potenti employ and ask for your social secur number and other person
inform befor give anyon your person inform follow the abov advic
and make sure to verifi the person ident
be suspici if contact unexpectedli and ask for your person inform it is
difficult to determin a compani legitimaci by read an email go to a websit or
talk to someon on the phone if your contact unexpectedli and ask to give out
your person inform a red flag should go up that someth is phishi
legitim compani and agenc do not oper thi wai
act immedi if youv been hook by a phisher if you provid account number
pin or password to a phisher notifi the compani with whom you have the
account right awai for inform about how to put a fraud alert on your file at
the credit report bureau and other advic for id theft victim contact the feder
trade commiss id theft clearinghous wwwconsumergovidtheft or tollfre
8774384338
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag via
sm the protocol us to us transmit text mess ag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
consum fraud financi transact
11730 2011 fraud examin manual
voic phish or vish
vish is a form of phish attack where email for on reason or anoth direct
recipi to dial a 1800 number where an autom record request that caller enter
person inform us a touchton phone
pharm
pharm is an attack in which a user is fool into enter sensit data such as a
password or credit card number into a malici websit that imperson a legitim
websit it is differ from phish in that the attack doe not have to reli on have the
user click on a link in the email to direct him to the fake websit pharm actual exploit
a vulner in the dn server softwar that allow a hacker to acquir the domain name
for a site and redirect the websit traffic from a legitim site to a fals on so even though
the user type in the correct websit address the pharm program send the user to an
illegitim site that look like the real thing unknowingli the user is then provid
password and inform directli to the hacker
recoveri room
recoveri room oper target those who have alreadi lost monei to a telemarket
scam pose as a consum advocaci group or a law firm telemarket offer victim a
chanc to recov ani fund thei mai have lost and bring the perpetr to justic onc
the victim agre legal investig and other fee will begin to emerg
