2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Senior Scams


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Senior Scams 
Older people are the favorite prey of telescammers.  In the U.S., they make up 11 percent of 
the population but constitute 32 percent of the victims of consumer fraud and 50 percent of 
all phone scam victims. Forty-five percent of senior citizens have been offered investments 
by a person unknown to them. Seniors own more than half of all financial assets in the U.S. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1713 
Fred Schulte, author of Fleeced!, relates the pitch delivered to an elderly woman in 
Philadelphia by Tim O’Neil. The woman told detectives about the more than $10,000 for 
which O’Neil and his lieutenants swindled her. O’Neil’s call to mollify the woman’s protests 
was recorded by the FBI. On the line, he insists the “collectibles” the woman bought, 
including “actual bullets excavated from the Civil War,” are genuine and valuable.  
 
Do you wear pendants? This is a beautiful, is a diamond … I’m not gonna ask you to 
spend a penny … 
  
How old are you? God bless you … 89 … 
  
We’re gonna get that out to you … Look for it  in the middle of next week, and then give 
us a call and then let us know how you like it … 
 
Well I hope I put a little sunshine in your day. Okay, honey and God bless you. Oh don’t 
cry now, we’re here to take care of you … We’ll  be here and if you need to talk to anybody 
at any time you give us a call okay? Bye, bye, and God bless you. 
 
Telemarketers usually call in the evening. Nighttime calls find people of every age in more 
impulsive moods. Seniors may be more vulnerable to pitches promising them extra money 
and luxury goods because many live on fixed incomes. These lottery-style gambits can seem 
like an easy way for the elderly to improve their financial status.  
 



:


senior scam
older peopl ar the favorit prei of telescamm in the us thei make up 11 percent of
the popul but constitut 32 percent of the victim of consum fraud and 50 percent of
all phone scam victim fortyf percent of senior citizen have been offer invest
by a person unknown to them senior own more than half of all financi asset in the us
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11713
fred schult author of fleec relat the pitch deliv to an elderli woman in
philadelphia by tim oneil the woman told detect about the more than 10000 for
which oneil and hi lieuten swindl her oneil call to mollifi the woman protest
wa record by the fbi on the line he insist the collect the woman bought
includ actual bullet excav from the civil war ar genuin and valuabl
do you wear pendant thi is a beauti is a diamond im not gonna ask you to
spend a penni
how old ar you god bless you 89
were gonna get that out to you look for it in the middl of next week and then give
us a call and then let us know how you like it
well i hope i put a littl sunshin in your dai okai honei and god bless you oh dont
cry now were here to take care of you well be here and if you need to talk to anybodi
at ani time you give us a call okai bye bye and god bless you
telemarket usual call in the even nighttim call find peopl of everi ag in more
impuls mood senior mai be more vulner to pitch promis them extra monei
and luxuri good becaus mani live on fix incom these lotterystyl gambit can seem
like an easi wai for the elderli to improv their financi statu
