2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Affinity Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Affinity Fraud 
Affinity fraud targets groups of people who have some social connection. Neighborhoods 
chiefly populated by racial minorities, especially immigrant groups, are often the site of 
affinity frauds. Religious and professional ties are often exploited. Marketing technology has 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1714                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
made it possible for a company to buy targeted lists, not just by location, but according to 
buying habits, leisure time activities, and club memberships. The most expensive lists carry 
the names of people who have already fallen for a telemarketing scam. This is called reloading.  
 
Chief among telescammers’ tricks is obfuscation. Salespeople read off lists of prizes, 
emphasizing big-ticket items like jewelry and cars, not mentioning that the odds of actually 
winning anything besides a trinket are astronomical. Schulte relates an incident in which 
victims were told they had won a Winnebago. Victims were asked to pay a handling fee of 
$2,900, a fraction of the cost of a new travel home. About two months later, victims found a 
delivery driver at their door with a Winnebago tent.  
 
Some operations actually encourage their marks to call and check with the Better Business 
Bureau (BBB) and with former customers, giving out the numbers for the person to call. 
These numbers ring at phony lines set up by the scammers, who give out a glowing 
recommendation. Phone rooms have been known to set up reference arms with titles like 
“The Better Business Bureau of America” or “International Better Business Bureau” to 
recommend their ventures. If a potential victim does reach the Better Business Bureau, 
chances are the report will contain little or nothing of use. The information in these files is 
usually ambiguous and out of date. 
 



:


affin fraud
affin fraud target group of peopl who have some social connect neighborhood
chiefli popul by racial minor especi immigr group ar often the site of
affin fraud religi and profession ti ar often exploit market technolog ha
consum fraud financi transact
11714 2011 fraud examin manual
made it possibl for a compani to bui target list not just by locat but accord to
bui habit leisur time activ and club membership the most expens list carri
the name of peopl who have alreadi fallen for a telemarket scam thi is call reload
chief among telescamm trick is obfusc salespeopl read off list of prize
emphas bigticket item like jewelri and car not mention that the odd of actual
win anyth besid a trinket ar astronom schult relat an incid in which
victim were told thei had won a winnebago victim were ask to pai a handl fee of
2900 a fraction of the cost of a new travel home about two month later victim found a
deliveri driver at their door with a winnebago tent
some oper actual encourag their mark to call and check with the better busi
bureau bbb and with former custom give out the number for the person to call
these number ring at phoni line set up by the scammer who give out a glow
recommend phone room have been known to set up refer arm with titl like
the better busi bureau of america or intern better busi bureau to
recommend their ventur if a potenti victim doe reach the better busi bureau
chanc ar the report will contain littl or noth of us the inform in these file is
usual ambigu and out of date
