2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Slamming


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Slamming 
Slamming occurs when a consumer’s telephone or electric service is switched from their 
current company to another one without their permission. Long distance is the most 
common target of telephone slamming, but it can also happen with local or local-toll service. 
Consumers should read the fine print on all contest entry forms, coupons, and other 
promotional materials as these might include an agreement to switch phone service. Federal 
law requires that written agreements to change phone service must be separate documents, 
not part of a prize package or other materials. If the company offers a check for the 
consumer to switch, the check must clearly state on the front and on the back, in the 
signature area, that the consumer is agreeing to change their service.  
 
Consumers should always check their phone bills carefully. If the consumer notices a new 
company name, he should call the number that’s  listed on that portion of the bill and ask for 
an explanation. If he has been slammed, he should inform the company that he did not agree 
to use its service. He should then contact his original phone company and ask to be 
reinstated to his old calling plan. Under federal law, the consumer can switch back for free 
and they don’t have to pay for the first 30 days of service from the slammer. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1722                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


slam
slam occur when a consum telephon or electr servic is switch from their
current compani to anoth on without their permiss long distanc is the most
common target of telephon slam but it can also happen with local or localtol servic
consum should read the fine print on all contest entri form coupon and other
promot materi as these might includ an agreement to switch phone servic feder
law requir that written agreement to chang phone servic must be separ document
not part of a prize packag or other materi if the compani offer a check for the
consum to switch the check must clearli state on the front and on the back in the
signatur area that the consum is agre to chang their servic
consum should alwai check their phone bill carefulli if the consum notic a new
compani name he should call the number that list on that portion of the bill and ask for
an explan if he ha been slam he should inform the compani that he did not agre
to us it servic he should then contact hi origin phone compani and ask to be
reinstat to hi old call plan under feder law the consum can switch back for free
and thei dont have to pai for the first 30 dai of servic from the slammer
consum fraud financi transact
11722 2011 fraud examin manual
