2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Timeshares


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Timeshares 
Another scam sells timeshares in condominiums for vacationers. Telemarketers pass 
themselves off as brokers to condominium owners and purport to specialize in selling 
timeshares.  
 
OPTIONS 
Ads in the real estate section of newspapers coax investors into buying “options” on 
property. Supposedly, the option locks in a present-day price on behalf of the purchaser, 
who can exercise the option later if he wishes to buy the land or to sell it at a profit. 
Sometimes the investor has bought nothing but a piece of paper — the “agent” has no 
authority to make deals on the property. Occasionally, the option is only valid for a few 
months, or is too vaguely worded to be enforceable. Usually there is an actual plot of land, 
but in most instances it is undevelopable due to location or zoning restrictions, and is 
therefore worthless. 
  
DEVELOPED PROPERTY  
The General Development Corporation of Florida ran a legendary land fraud scam in which 
potential investors were shown lots and houses guaranteed to make them rich. In this 
rendering of the “buy-and-fly” sham, victims were shepherded, and their contracts restricted, 
until they signed a deal for a lot. The scam continued for approximately six years and cost 
victims millions. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1723 



:


timeshar
anoth scam sell timeshar in condominium for vacation telemarket pass
themselv off as broker to condominium owner and purport to special in sell
timeshar
option
ad in the real estat section of newspap coax investor into bui option on
properti supposedli the option lock in a presentdai price on behalf of the purchas
who can exercis the option later if he wish to bui the land or to sell it at a profit
sometim the investor ha bought noth but a piec of paper the agent ha no
author to make deal on the properti occasion the option is onli valid for a few
month or is too vagu word to be enforc usual there is an actual plot of land
but in most instanc it is undevelop due to locat or zone restrict and is
therefor worthless
develop properti
the gener develop corpor of florida ran a legendari land fraud scam in which
potenti investor were shown lot and hous guarante to make them rich in thi
render of the buyandfli sham victim were shepherd and their contract restrict
until thei sign a deal for a lot the scam continu for approxim six year and cost
victim million
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11723
