2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes 
 
Definition 
A Ponzi scheme is generally defined as an illegal business practice in which new investors’ 
money is used to make payments to earlier investors. A simple investment scam rakes in as 
much money as possible and then disappears. A Ponzi stays in business by turning some of 
the money back into the game. A few conspicuous rewards early on will whip up interest, the 
business will grow, and then, if they’re smart and lucky, the operators will split. 
 
Everyone involved pretends to mount a legitimate organization, but little or no commercial 
activity takes place. Payoffs are made from the pool of investor funds; the rest is siphoned 
into operators’ pockets. Schemes may run for at least a year. Some Ponzis have flourished 
for a decade or more.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1731 
In accounting terms, money paid to Ponzi investors, described as income, is actually  
distribution of capital. It’s like giving away the store. Instead of sharing profits, you’re sharing 
cash reserves. 
 
Approaching this crime analytically we can see into the mechanics of the fraud. Illegal cash is 
hidden in securities or other financial instruments. Promoters use phony accounts, phony 
books, and phony names. Successful prosecutions have to uncover these guises and track the 
funds. Plus, the inner workings of a Ponzi operation have to be summarized for a jury, 
whose members are probably not mathematicians or accountants.  
 
Madoff and Stanford: Ponzi Rises Again 
In early 2009, Ponzi schemes became headline news when Bernard “Bernie” Madoff pleaded 
guilty to a $50 billion Ponzi scheme, the largest in U.S. history, and R. Allen Stanford was 
charged with running an $8 billion dollar Ponzi:  
 
 
Bernard “Bernie” Madoff 
 
Introduction 
On December 11, 2008, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents arrested Bernard 
“Bernie” Madoff, a 70-year-old businessman and former chairman of the NASDAQ 
stock market, and charged him on a single count of securities fraud. According to the 
charging document, the arrest came after Madoff told two senior employees — later identified 
as his sons — that his investment advisory business was “basically, a giant Ponzi scheme,” 
estimating that investors lost approximately $50 billion in his fraud. Federal prosecutors, 
however, put the amount at $64.8 billion.  
 
Background 
Before his arrest, Madoff enjoyed a sterling reputation, recognized as a financial 
mastermind. In 1960, Madoff founded his investment company, Bernard L. Madoff 
Investment Securities LLC, with $5,000 he earned from his jobs as a lifeguard and a 
sprinkler installer. The business eventually became one of the five broker/dealers that 
helped create the NASDAQ stock exchange, which Madoff later chaired, and established 
itself as one of the top market maker businesses on Wall Street (the sixth largest in 2008).  
Madoff was also a widely respected philanthropist, devoting his time and wealth to 
numerous charitable causes. He not only established his own multimillion-dollar private 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1732                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation that donated money to educational, cultural, and health charities, he also served 
on the boards of several nonprofit institutions. 
 
Madoff’s Investment Scheme 
Even though it is not clear when Madoff’s investment fraud began (federal investigators 
believe the fraud may have begun in the 1970s while Madoff himself stated that it began in 
the 1990s), it is clear that Madoff’s unusually consistent returns, showing annualized 
returns from eight to twelve percent, were not the result of his investment strategy.    
 
Before his confession, Madoff claimed that he generated the steady returns by employing a 
“split-strike conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that 
involves a combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to 
generate predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely 
correlated to an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put 
options on the same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay  clients who requested 
withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds from 
new investments to pay them off.   
 
How Madoff Made It Happen 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, which collapse in a few years as withdrawals exceed deposits, 
Madoff’s con lasted longer, spread farther, and caused more losses than any similar scheme 
in history. Understandably, the Madoff case raises the question, “How did Madoff fool so 
many people for so long?” Of course, there is  no single answer to explain the success of 
Madoff’s scheme, but there are several factors that contributed to its unusual prosperity, 
including his ability to attract new investors, maintain stability, and avoid detection. These 
are explored in the following sections. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1733 
Attracted New Investors  
Madoff’s ability to attract new investors is one reason for his scheme’s success. For years, 
Madoff’s scheme did not collapse because he successfully raised enough money from new 
investors to keep paying returns. Several factors contributed to Madoff ’s ability to entice 
new investors. Most significantly, reports of solid, long-term, and low-risk returns, 
regardless of the market environment, lured new investors through a false sense of security. 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, Madoff did not promise extraordinary returns. Instead, he 
promised stability and long-term profits. In other words, Madoff attracted new investors by 
avoiding the appearance of risk.  
 
Similarly, his reputation and professional stature provided comfort to his investors. As a 
major figure in NASDAQ, a pioneering market maker, and a government advisor on 
market issues, Madoff’s résumé was exceptional. Madoff also enjoyed a longstanding 
reputation as a modest and humble individual, a man who put his family first and donated 
much of his time and money to several charitable causes. 
 
Moreover, Madoff lured new investors by promoting secrecy and exploiting the complexities 
inherent to the industry. Madoff emphasized secrecy by keeping his investors and investment 
strategies from the general public, which created a sense of exclusivity and an enigmatic 
enticement in his investment accounts. Additionally, Madoff understood that the complex 
and cryptic nature of the securities industry caused investors to feel that it is a discipline for 
people who are much smarter, and he exploited this by marketing his split-strike conversion 
investment method as “too complicated for outsiders to understand.” These characteristics 
allowed Madoff to shift investors’ fears from the risk of losing money to the risk that they 
might miss out on making money, creating an environment ripe for fraudulent practices. 
 
Maintained Stability  
In addition to attracting new investors, some experts suggest that Madoff successfully 
avoided large, unexpected withdrawals that would lead to the collapse of his scheme by 
targeting wealthy individuals and charities. Since the wealthy feel any economic downturn 
last and least, such investors provided Madoff with the money he needed to keep his scheme 
going. Similarly, Professor Mitchell Zuckoff, author of Ponzi’s Scheme: The True Story of 
a Financial Legend, argues that “[b]y targeting charities, Madoff could avoid the threat of 
sudden or unexpected withdrawals.” Zuckoff says that charitable foundations are legally 
required to spend only five percent of their funds each year and that this low rate of 
withdrawals allowed Madoff’s scheme to avoid detection as long as he attracted new 
investors.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1734                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A voided Detection  
Despite multiple SEC investigations and allegations of fraud beginning as early as 1999, 
Madoff’s investment scheme continued without detection. There are several reasons for this. 
In particular, he constructed his investment business to avoid most regulatory oversight and 
other checks and balances. Although private investment pools, such as hedge funds, are 
subject to limited oversight, Madoff’s firm was a different kind of entity. Unlike private 
investment pools, which use an outside brokerage firm to execute their trades, Madoff’s firm 
was a broker/dealer with an asset-management division, allowing the firm to process all of 
its own trades. Similarly, while most private investment pools typically keep their client 
funds or securities with an external custodian, Madoff’s firm kept its funds in-house. 
Essentially, these practices helped keep his activities hidden from view.  
 
Madoff also avoided the obligation to use a PCAOB-registered auditor by structuring his 
firm as a privately held broker/dealer. This allowed his firm to use an unknown auditing 
firm with only three employees (one of whom was a 78-year-old living in Florida) and no 
other large Wall Street clients.  
 
Equally important is that Madoff avoided filing required disclosures of his firm’s holdings 
with the SEC. Madoff did this by saying that his firm sold all of its holdings for cash at 
the end of every reporting period.  
 
In addition to operating his business on the outskirts of regulation, Madoff avoided 
detection by discouraging the use of prudent investor tools like due diligence, audit 
statements, and understanding of investment strategy. Notably, evidence shows that Madoff 
kicked some investors out of his funds for asking too many questions. Likewise, Madoff 
reportedly shunned questions from investment media about his strategy, and, as noted 
above, Madoff conducted his investment business with great secrecy and even refused to 
provide clients with online access to their accounts.  
 
Red Flags 
With the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flags in Madoff’s investment advisory 
business, and if nothing else, the Madoff saga can provide some simple lessons to help 
identify and prevent similar Ponzi schemes. The most apparent red flags are discussed 
below.  
 
Steady Returns  
The most obvious red flag was that Madoff’s firm generated consistently steady, positive 
returns during his seventeen-year track record, with no down year and very few negative 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1735 
months, regardless of market conditions. And even though Madoff attributed this to his 
split-strike conversion investment strategy, a technique that can generate profits over many 
years, this type of strategy will generate some down months and exhibit more volatility than 
Madoff’s reported returns. In other words, Madoff’s profits were too good to be true. 
 
Extreme Secrecy and Lack of Transparency  
Madoff’s secrecy and lack of transparency in the operations of his business and investment 
process provided yet another red flag. As disc ussed above, reports indicate that Madoff was 
extremely secretive regarding his investment strategy. Specifically, Madoff never clearly 
defined his split-strike conversion strategy, which other traders could not duplicate, and he 
refused to answer questions ab out his investment strategies. In addition, Madoff did not 
provide his clients with a high level of detail  in their monthly statements and refused to 
provide online access to their accounts. 
 
Madoff also kept information from other employees at his firm. According to a senior 
employee, Madoff “kept the financial statements for the firm under lock and key” and was 
“cryptic” about his investment advisory busin ess, which he operated from a separate floor, 
when discussing it with other employees. 
 
Lack of Job Segregation  
The lack of job segregation was another red flag that should have raised concerns about 
Madoff’s operations. Unlike typical hedge funds that use a network of third-party service 
providers to perform certain functions, Madoff’s firm performed these operations internally 
and with no third-party oversight. A hedge fund’s network of third-party service providers 
typically includes an investment manager to manage the assets, a broker (or brokers) to 
manage the trades, a fund administrator, and a custodian/prime broker. These third 
parties provide essential checks and balances necessary to protect individuals and 
institutions. Madoff’s firm, on the other hand, performed these functions internally. Madoff 
not only traded his managed accounts in-house by operating as a broker/dealer, he also 
maintained custody of his clients’ assets, indicating that there was no independent custodian 
to verify the existence of assets.  
 
Small Accounting Firm  
One of the most significant red flags was the firm’s unknown auditor, Friehling & 
Horowitz, a firm that employed  only three people. Clearly, it seems inconceivable that a 
three-person operation could adequately audit a firm of Madoff’s size and complexity. 
Furthermore, the accounting firm had only one active accountant, David Friehling, who 
had not registered with the PCAOB, an independent agency that was created under the 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1736                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sarbanes-Oxley Act to help detect fraud. Similarly, the firm was not peer reviewed, a 
process in which audit organizations assess each other for internal quality control. 
According to the AICPA, the accounting firm was not required to participate in any peer 
reviews because Friehling informed the group that the firm had not conducted audits for 15 
years.   
 
On March 18, 2009, Friehling became the second person charged in the fraud scandal. 
According to federal prosecutors, Friehling was charged with securities fraud, aiding and 
abetting investment-advisor fraud, and for filing false audit reports to the SEC.   
 
Unusual Fee Structure  
The structure of the firm’s compensation also raised red flags. Unlike most hedge funds, 
which charge management and performance fees, Madoff’s firm earned commissions on each 
trade. This unusual fee structure raised many  questions. Why would the firm not act like a 
hedge fund and profit from big gains? Why would it let third-party distributors get these 
fees? 
 
Tips from More than One Source  
Finally, outside analysts raised critical questions about Madoff’s firm for years. For 
example, in 2001, an article that appeared on the MARHedge website, titled “Madoff 
Tops Charts: Skeptics Ask How,” seriously  questioned Madoff’s ability to deliver 
incredibly consistent returns. A subsequent Barron’s article titled “Don’t Ask, Don’t 
Tell” raised the same concerns, noting that  “some on Wall Street remain skeptical about 
how Madoff achieves such stunning double-digit returns.”  
 
Still, the most notable critique came from independent fraud investigator Harry 
Markopolos, CFE, CFA. In 1999, Markopolos started a campaign to persuade the 
SEC that Madoff’s returns could not be legally generated using the investment strategies 
that he claimed to use. Despite receiving little attention, Markopolos continued to send 
SEC officials information about Madoff, and, in 2005, Markopolos presented the SEC 
with a 17-page memo titled “The world’s largest hedge fund is a fraud.” In the memo, 
Markopolos outlined 29 red flags in Madoff’s business dealings and argued that Madoff 
was either front-running client orders or operating “the world’s largest Ponzi scheme.” This 
time, the SEC responded to Markopolos’s tips and initiated an investigation. 
Unfortunately, the investigation did not uncover any evidence of a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Finally, several financial institutions, including Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Credit 
Suisse Group AG, either refused to do business with Madoff or advised their customers 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1737 
against it. In fact, Goldman Sachs blacklisted Madoff’s firm after it failed to pass their 
standards of due diligence.  
 
Conclusion 
In 2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, 
one count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He 
was sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion 
dollars (the amount prosecutors say flowed through his business). Given the size, scope, and 
complexities involved in the fraud, the process of unraveling Madoff’s web of financial 
dealings could take years, and the full extent of the damage caused by his scheme may never 
be known.  
 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Stanford International Bank, et al. 
R. Allen Stanford, a prominent financier, philanthropist, and sponsor of sports teams, had 
been on the radar of regulators for years thanks to the oddly stable and generous returns 
offered by his firm’s certificates of deposit. But recently, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), perhaps inspired by Madoff’s alleged $50 billion Ponzi scheme, took 
a renewed interest in Stanford and his operations. On February 27, 2009, the SEC filed 
a complaint alleging that Stanford, three of his companies, and two of his executives carried 
out a “massive Ponzi scheme” for at least a decade, involving billions of dollars of investor 
funds. 
 
The Parties  
Plaintiff  
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
 
Defendants  
Stanford International Bank, Ltd. (SIB) 
Stanford Group Company (SGC)—Investment adviser to SIB 
Stanford Capital Management, LLC ( SCG)—Investment adviser to SIB 
R. Allen Stanford (Stanford)—Chairman, chief executive officer, and sole shareholder of 
the Stanford operations 
James M. Davis (Davis)—Director and chief financial officer of SFG and SIB 
Laura Pendergest-Holt (Pendergest-Holt)—C hief investment officer of SFG and a 
member of SIB’s investment committee 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1738                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Relief Defendants  
Stanford Financial Group (SFG) 
The Stanford Financial Gr oup Bldg Inc. (SFGB) 
 
The Allegations 
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a number of allegations against the 
defendants in its First Amended Complaint filed on February 27, 2009 with the U.S. 
District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division. These allegations 
include: 
 
• Stanford and Davis misappropriated billions of dollars of investor funds and 
falsified SIB’s financial statements in an effort to conceal their Ponzi scheme. 
• Pendergest-Holt facilitated the scheme by misrepresenting to investors that she 
managed SIB’s multi-billion investment portfolio of assets and employed a sizable 
team of analysts to monitor the portfolio. 
• SIB sold approximately $8 billion of certificates of deposit (CDs) through 
deceiving investors about the security of the CDs and the assets in which the bank 
was investing. 
• Stanford and Davis “invested” an undetermined amount of investor funds in 
speculative, unprofitable private businesses controlled by Stanford. 
• Stanford and Davis fabricated the performance of SIB’s investment portfolio in 
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor funds flowing in; the fabricated 
financial information in no way revealed the true performance of the bank’s 
investment portfolio. 
• SGC and SCM advisers used materially false and misleading historical 
performance data to sell more than $1 billion of a proprietary mutual fund wrap 
program, generating fees for SGC and SCM in excess of $25 million. 
• The Defendants violated or aided and abetted violations of the Securities Act of 
1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Investment Advisors Act of 
1940, and the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
 
The Red Flags 
Despite being such an opaque operation, operating in a minimally regulated jurisdiction, 
and offering suspiciously stable returns on its investments, SIB did an excellent job of 
attracting investors and fielding regulators for quite some time. And whether or not 
Stanford is guilty of running the alleged $8 billion Ponzi scheme remains to be seen. But 
regardless of the outcome of the case, one cannot deny the existence of a number of warning 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1739 
signs indicative of a Ponzi scheme or other investment fraud. The red flags discussed below 
should have had investors and regulators intrigued, if not downright apprehensive. 
 
Impressive, Yet Oddly Stable, Returns  
SIB purported to achieve double-digit returns on its investments for the past 15 years. Not 
only were the returns oddly stable, but they were quite impressive, especially for such a 
“liquid” investment, often more than double the returns offered by big banks. For example, 
the interest rate offered by SIB in February 2009 on a one-year CD (requiring a $50,000 
minimum investment in the United States) was approximately 4.5%, according to the 
bank’s website, while Bankrate.com reported the average interest rate offered by U.S. 
banks to be about 2%. Even more interesting is that despite massive losses in the stock 
market and hedge funds in 2008, SIB claimed to experience a loss of only 1.3% for that 
period and continued to pay out above-average returns.  
 
Opaque Investment Strategy  
There was a stunning lack of transparency into the investment strategy used by SIB. The 
bank claimed to generate its impressive returns by investing the CD money largely in 
corporate stocks, real estate, hedge funds, and precious metals, but offered few specifics, even 
in its annual report. SIB’s strategy is a bit unusual, as most issuers of CDs invest CD 
money in higher-yielding U.S. Treasury bonds or similarly conservative instruments. 
Marketing materials claimed that the bank was able to offer substantially higher returns as 
a result of investing in a “well-diversified portfolio of highly marketable securities issued by 
stable governments, strong multinational companies, and major international banks,” and 
also as a result of Antigua’s low taxes and moderate overhead costs. 
 
Incredibly Small Auditing Firm  
The 14-person Antigua-based accounting firm, C.A.S. Hewlett & Co., seemed grossly 
inadequate to audit the books of a bank that claims to manage and advise $50 billion in 
investor funds — but that’s who Stanford relied upon for his auditing needs. 
 
Inbred Governance Structure  
The independence and objectivity of the bank’s board of directors were questionable given 
that the seven-member board was dominated by Stanford insiders, family, and friends. 
 
Very High Level of Spending  
Although selling CDs is typically a low-margin business, Stanford was able to offer much 
higher than average compensation to brokers, including large bonuses, luxury cars, and 
expensive vacations. Stanford’s empire was also known to spend vast sums of money on its 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1740                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
many offices. Additionally, Stanford’s companies were a big corporate sponsor of 
professional sports teams and charitable causes, and they contributed heavily to political 
campaigns.  
 
Unusual Background of Chief Investment Officer  
The qualifications of Pendergest-Holt, the chief investment officer of SFG and a member of 
SIB’s investment committee, are insufficient to explain her meteoric rise to the top of 
Stanford’s empire. She did not have a business school degree, nor did she have any 
experience as an analyst at a Wall Street firm or large mutual fund company. All of her 
training was received on the job while working for Stanford. 
 
Concerns Voiced by a Number of Former Brokers/Employees  
Over the years, there have been a number of  grievances (including lawsuits and public 
arbitration cases) aired against SFG and SIB by former employees and brokers, including 
claims that the firms were running a Ponzi or pyramid scheme, claims that 
employees/brokers were dismissed for objecting to and raising concerns about the legality of 
the firms’ practices, claims that the firms used  investor money to finance its brokerage arm, 
and claims that the firms misled investors by offering artificially high yields on their CDs.  
 
Revocation of Banking License in Montserrat  
Prior to Stanford International Bank, Stanford operated Guardian International Bank 
(which also issued questionable CDs) in the British territory of Montserrat in the 
Caribbean. But in 1991, after the local government moved to revoke Guardian’s banking 
license under hazy circumstances, Stanford relocated to Antigua and renamed his bank 
Stanford International Bank.  
 
At the time of this writing, the only charges against Stanford and Davis were civil fraud 
charges. Pendergest-Holt, however, had been arrested by federal prosecutors and charged 
with criminal obstruction of justice (to which she pleaded innocent) for giving misleading 
statements to SEC investigators. Perhaps prosecutors hope to secure a quick guilty plea 
from her, so that, with a plea deal in hand, they can use her as a witness against Stanford 
and Davis. Regardless of the outcome of the case, investors should be wary any time they 
come across a yield far higher than average with no clear, plausible, and legal explanation. 
 
Illegal Pyramid or Ponzi Scheme? 
What’s the difference between an illegal pyramid scheme and a Ponzi scheme? They both 
use new investors’ money to make payoffs. But they’re run very differently by their 
promoters, and legally they’re prosecuted under different laws. 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1741 
First we’ll distinguish between legal and illegal pyramid schemes. Then we’ll show how a 
Ponzi scheme and an illegal pyramid are the same thing, only different. 
 
Pyramid Schemes, Legal and Illegal 
 
Illegal pyramids generate revenue by continually recruiting new members. These operations 
may offer merchandise or services for sale, but the only significant revenues come from 
recruitment. 
 
Some legitimate merchandising companies use a pyramid structure to rank their employee-owners 
and to determine those people’s compensation. But a pyramid structure becomes a 
pyramid scheme when the company makes its money by recruiting people. Instead of selling 
a product or service, the group deals primarily in new memberships. Joining the group allows 
the new member to profit by signing up new members. The process continues until the 
available pool of new members is drained, which happens sooner than one might think.  
 
Usually there’s a product or a cause that fronts the illegal pyramid scheme as a legitimate 
enterprise. Promoters shill beeswax supplements, or claim they’re working to prevent youth 
crime. A favorite product front offers “courses” in areas like “investor education” or “self 
esteem.” These materials usually convey very little pertinent information; in fact, they’re 
nothing more than motivational tracts designed to make the victim a more enthusiastic 
participant in the pyramid.  
 
In any case, regardless of the product front, an illegal pyramid emphasizes recruiting first and 
foremost. The product or service takes a back seat to getting new suckers signed up. 
 
As a rule of thumb most courts apply the 70 Percent Rule. This requires that at least 70 
percent of distributor’s profits come from retail sales. Of course this figure can be hard to 
verify. Distributors routinely sign falsified compliance statements because if they don’t, 
promoters warn, the authorities will shut the whole thing down and everyone loses. 
 
In the final assessment, legality rests on what the operators emphasize. If the company 
emphasizes the recruitment of new members over the sales of products, and if the only way 
to recognize promised riches is through recruitment, then the operation will likely be 
classified as an illegal pyramid. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1742                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
What’s the Difference Between an Illegal Pyramid and a Ponzi Scheme? 
 
Illegal pyramids are promoted as pyramids. Ponzi schemes are promoted as investment 
opportunities. 
 
The key element in a Ponzi scheme is that initial investors are paid with subsequent 
investors’ money. There is litle or no legitimate commerce.  
 
The same thing occurs in an illegal pyramid. Nobody’s selling the beeswax supplements; 
they’re all coaxing new people to put up money. The original members of the pyramid get 
rich on subsequent investors’ money. So, a pyramid is a Ponzi scheme.  
 
How about the obverse? Is a Ponzi scheme a pyramid? The distinguishing factor of the 
illegal pyramid is the continual need for new investors. Each new member recruits two 
members, who each recruit two, and so forth.  
 
Ponzi schemes, like pyramids, require a steady march of new investor funds to pay 
dividends. This ever-growing pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graphed. So, in the 
sense that it requires exponential growth to avoid collapse, a Ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme.  
 
The difference between a Ponzi and a pyramid lies in how the operation is promoted.  
 
Illegal pyramids announce themselves as pyramids: they hype levels or stages in their literature. 
The pyramidal structure helps draw new players, each believing that they will rise through 
the ranks of the pyramid to become “golden,” or “fully vested”—whatever hokey titles the 
scammers have concocted. 
 
A Ponzi scheme, on the other hand, masquerades as some type of investment — in financial 
instruments, mineral rights, or some other form of speculation. The participants believe 
they’re buying mortgage-backed securities, or partial interest in an oil well. They have no idea 
they’re funneling money into a bottomless pit.  Certainly no one suggests moving on to the 
next level of the pyramid, because the pyramid isn’t part of the pitch. 
 
When an enterprise—Nu-Skin International, for example — promotes itself as an 
organization with levels or stages, and the only way to rise through the levels is to recruit 
new members, the promoters are running an illegal pyramid scheme. Before Tim and 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1743 
Melinda Rommel sued Nu-Skin, they were true believers, sprinkling Nu-Skin products across 
their bathrooms and kitchens, serving Splash, Nu-Skin’s answer to Tang, for breakfast every 
day, and even redecorating their house at the behest of Nu-Skin consultants, all for the 
purpose of snaring new recruits. The Rommels sued because they were misled about their 
opportunities inside the organization. They knew all along they were joining a pyramid, they 
just thought it was a legal one. 
 
When an enterprise promotes an investment opportunity that invests little or none of the 
participants’ money and that uses new investment dollars to make dividend payments, the 
promoters are running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Distinguishing between Ponzis and pyramids seems a bit academic. But the differences 
become significant when perpetrators are brought to justice. To prosecute an illegal pyramid, 
the enforcement team needs to show that the offenders generated revenue mainly through 
recruitment—the company’s pyramidal structure is an element of the charge. Pyramid 
schemes are sometimes charged as illegal lotteries because, prosecutors have successfully 
argued, the participants are totally dependent on the actions of others for any compensation.  
 
In another prosecution strategy, operators are charged with falsely representing potential 
earnings, since the mathematical limits of the pyramid make the promised $10,000 a month 
impossible or extremely against the odds. Again, the pyramidal structure itself is an issue in 
the case. 
 
In summary: 
 
If operators make the bulk of participants’ earnings dependent on recruiting, and 
emphasize levels and stages in their promotions, we call this an illegal pyramid. 
 
If operators claim they’re offering an investment opportunity, but conduct little or no 
commercial activity, we call this a Ponzi scheme. 
 
Categories of Ponzi Schemes 
Ponzi schemes are classified according to the front used in their promotion. The categories 
are pure cash (which includes endless chain schemes and fill-and-split games) and product fronts  
(which includes financial instruments, MLMs, and speculations).  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1744                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Pure Cash Schemes 
There are two general types of pure cash schemes: endless chains and fill-and-split games. 
 
ENDLESS CHAINS 
The most outrageous pyramid scams don’t bother to hide their stripes. They don’t use 
services or products to establish their legitimacy. Instead they use the “chain letter” 
approach. The recipient of the letter sends a sum of money ($5, $50, $100, the amount varies 
but isn’t usually very large) to the person who mailed them the letter, then passes the letter 
on to three or four others.  
 
Probability studies have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the players in a pyramid (everyone 
but those at the earliest initiation) will lose most of their money. Fully half can expect to lose 
everything they put in.  
 
Some Internet chains have become known as “administered” pyramid schemes — every 
exchange in the chain is monitored by a central administrator, who makes sure everybody’s 
playing (and paying) along. The administrator takes a cut of each transaction.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1745 
FILL-AND-SPLIT GAMES 
The best way to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with gaming elements, some kind 
of hook to keep players’ attention focused on their riches and not how stupid their latest 
“opportunity” really is. These are sometimes called “fill-and-split games.” A popular version 
of this approach has been known as “Airplane.” Each player buys a seat on a fictitious 
airplane, paying from $200 to $2,000 a seat, depending on the scale of the game. Initial 
players help recruit new “passengers” and move up through the ranks of “crew,” “copilot,” 
and “pilot.” When a flight is fully booked — with something like six passengers, four crew 
members, a copilot, and a pilot — the plane takes off, the pilots and crew are paid for the 
flight, and everybody moves up the ranks. Just like a real airline, a plane’s investors are 
constantly looking to fill their seats.  
 
Another variation of the fill-and-split game tries to capitalize on the phenomenal profits 
yielded over the last 15 years by the American stock market. Called “Financial Networking,” 
“Market Climb,” or another financial-sounding name, these pure cash pyramids use a business 
metaphor in their pitch. A typical operation spreads 15 people over four levels. Eight investors 
buy into the network as “vice-presidents”; above them are four “presidents,” just below two 
“cochairman” positions; at the top, sitting pretty, is the “chairman.” Every time the eight slots 
at the bottom are filled (average price $1,500 to $2,000), the pyramid splits. The chairman gets 
out of the game with a “golden parachute” and everyone moves up the corporate ladder, 
anxiously scanning for new recruits.  
 
These games are usually predicated on what’s become known as affinity fraud. New players 
are recruited by their affinity with existing participants. People comb religious groups or 
community associations for fresh leads. Affinities may be racial or cultural. Financial 
networking, for example, has targeted a number of African-American communities. 
Churches, synagogues, and other religious organizations offer fertile hunting grounds and 
great cover from promoters—an endorsement from a clergyperson is as good as gold, and 
law enforcement authorities are often reluctant to meddle in religious affairs. Affinity frauds 
may also prey on social groups or professional organizations.  
 
Product Fronts 
The category of product fronts is subdivided into financial instruments, MLMs, and 
speculations. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1746                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 
Financial instruments — such as stocks, borrower’s certificates, currency exchanges, loan 
scams, and investment pools—are perfect tools for the Ponzi artist. Charles Ponzi’s victims 
in 1920 thought they were investing in postal reply coupons that, Ponzi assured everyone, 
yielded whopping profits by playing off the exchange rates of international currency. In our 
own time, as legal tender in Mexico, Brazil, and Asia roller-coasters from one extreme to the 
next, the currency exchange still makes an ideal Ponzi front.  
 
A stock market that gains 25 to 30 percent a year (and individual stocks quadrupling, 
sometimes in a matter of months) encourages the impression that all anyone has to do is put 
down their money and wait by the mailbox. Unscrupulous promoters like to tout new items 
like Internet stocks and biotechnology startups, but any product will do. Even in this wired 
age, commodities futures—from soybeans to pork bellies—are still numbered among the 
most common bait for Ponzi schemes. 
 
Financial instruments are especially effective fronts because most people don’t understand 
how legitimate financial operations take place. When Wall Street is set a-fluttering by 
derivatives of futures contracts, and hedge funds are betting that the market will rise at the 
same time they’re betting it will fall, how is  an average investor with $20,000 supposed to 
understand his options?  
 
MULTILEVEL MARKETING 
When most people hear about a pyramid scheme, they think multilevel marketing, or MLM 
as it’s often abbreviated. These organizations hawk nutrition supplements, household goods, 
cosmetics, television antennas, insurance, long distance phone service, everything from 
antiques to zinc. Also among the offerings might be copies of How to Make a Million Dollars in 
an MLM. One of the industry’s monster money makers is a string of “training materials” 
designed to pump the sales force into ever higher feats of huckstership.  
 
Math remains the great enemy, as well as the prime tool, of MLMs. Promoters scratch 
matrices (never pyramids) on a chalkboard, and compute what 20 people mailing money to a 
distributor’s house every month would amount to in a year’s time. These shillers ignore 
other aspects of the equation. First, the market for any product outside those owned by large 
national brands is extremely small. Cashing in on a submarket requires an excess of savvy, 
finance, and luck, which most MLM-ers lack in spades. Then there’s pyramidal 
mathematics — after a couple of levels, you ru n out of people willing to hear your spiel 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1747 
(which was already less than 5 percent of any area’s population). In fact, between 90 and 95 
percent of MLM operations fail in their first two years (compared to a 70-80 percent failure 
rate for small businesses in general).  
 
As a rule of thumb, any organization that recruits distributors into a pyramid-style 
compensation plan, offers big payoffs for recruiting (say, more than $100 per recruit), and 
spends more time trumpeting its distributor levels than its product lines, is probably illegal.  
 
SPECULATIONS 
For the purpose of this course, the term speculation describes any investment proposition not 
covered as financial instruments or MLMs. This includes franchise offerings and business 
opportunities in general, work-at-home promotions, and investments in areas like real estate 
or mineral rights. These are good old-fashioned investments, except when they’re Ponzi 
schemes. 
 
Franchise scams hawk such opportunities as pay phone businesses or vending machines. By 
their nature, such businesses are spread out geographically and don’t involve much direct 
contact with the promoter and the franchise holder.  
 
Work-at-home promotions are also favorite tools of the franchise scammer. Computer 
technology is a popular front, since thousands of people really are setting up businesses from 
their homes. A few early dividend checks, per the Ponzi playbook, are often enough to 
overcome a client’s hesitation and provoke a more sizeable investment. Then the promoters 
can fold up and move to another state, or another coast.  
 
Big-money speculations often base their high-flown claims in the ground beneath our feet. 
Land, and the minerals drawn from it like gold, coal, and oil, has anciently been regarded as 
the ultimate commodity. The ground is the fundament of every human endeavor so, perhaps 
the land swindle is also the fundament of fraud. Someone, somewhere, it seems, has always 
been selling flooded lots to homesteaders, salting gold mines with chunks of pyrite, or 
assuring a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acres of desert he 
just bought for a song. 
 
Obviously, a commercial environment that thrives on speculation is ripe for Ponzi fraud. 
Remember, the Ponzi element in a Ponzi scheme is only a technique — giving back a few 
dollars to sweeten the pot. Anything that can coax people to part with their money, from 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1748                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
emu farms to underwater land developments, can be run as a Ponzi. All the name Ponzi 
really means is that a few marks get paid. This lends a competitive element to an otherwise 
run-of-the-mill fraud. Instead of everyone losing, some lucky players do make money. 
 
Speculations frauds don’t always start out as cons, but when their rollercoaster dips, many 
speculators find it too tempting to hang on and ride — they figure they can phony their way 
through the crisis, and pick up again later. Again, it’s math that usually dooms these players. 
They simply can’t make money fast enough to feed the deficits. They need a payoff so big 
nothing short of a miracle — or more fraud — will suffice. 
 
Speculators can quickly get caught in a chain reaction, where each fraud demands more 
fraud. By the time these organizations are shut down, they’re spending half of their resources 
or more just covering up their criminal acts.  
 
Spotting Pyramid Schemes 
Almost everyone knows what a pyramid scheme is. People see them exposed on television 
and read about them constantly in magazines and newspapers. So, if everyone is so well 
informed about the pyramid, how does it survive? 
 
It could be that familiarity has lulled the public into a false sense of security. Pyramiders have 
several strong weapons at their disposal: 
• They do pay off. Unlike a simple con game in which the fraudster throws the ruse, grabs 
the cash, and exits, pyramiding builds up the take by paying initial investors. This makes 
for excellent testimonials. Early players circulate the word and bring in new marks. Initial 
payoffs also keep early players coming back. Payoffs make the enterprise look legitimate 
and fuel the expansion process. Charles Phillip Elliot ran his investment business 
pyramid-style for 16 years, taking in more than $60 million from 1,100 investors. When 
Elliot was busted, a business associate quipped, “Elliot paid like a slot machine. He lulled 
everyone to sleep.” 2   
• They operate mainly through preexisting affiliations. Community groups, religious 
organizations, and social clubs all make enticing targets for pyramiders. Any pyramid 
requires a healthy pool of participants, so a large group already gathered together is ideal. 
Besides that, pyramiders know how to manipulate the trust that people place in these 
groups.  
                                                          
2 Holzman, Todd. Business Dateline. October 1987. Pages 16ff.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1749 
• They use ingenuity and false logic in their pitches. The product fronts available for 
pyramiding are myriad, from bath soap to electronics. Fronts in financial instruments 
and real estate are especially effective because most people don’t understand how those 
businesses work anyway. Pure cash games find clever metaphors—like a conceptual 
airplane, or a business executives’ hierarchy — to make themselves attractive.  
 
Pyramiders of every stripe use a seductive, though false, logic in their pitch: “Everybody has 
friends and associates; you only have to sign up three or four people below you.” Of course 
the laws of mathematics spell doom to this logic. There simply aren’t enough players to keep 
even a small pyramid running. Three people, each finding three people, will quickly play out 
their available friends and associates — if not mathematically, then socially. There’s also a 
reasonable limit on how quickly money can grow. 
 
The pyramid, then, is built to overcome people’s most common misgivings about investing. 
Promoters offer far more than an “undertaking of great advantage, nobody to know what it 
is.” They are very specific in their prospectus.  The offer sounds good and (within its own 
logic) makes sense. The “opportunity” is usually pitched by someone familiar to the victim, 
or at least by someone with an affinity the victim trusts. Most importantly, the pyramid does 
return people’s money, with the incredible profits attached as promised.  
 
Speed is another potent weapon in the pyramid arsenal. Cons say, “Get in now, or regret it 
forever.” They don’t have time — because of market demand, or commitments elsewhere —
 for the person to check out the deal. That’s because a moderate amount of due diligence 
research will expose the deal as a scheme.  
 
The final factor is greed. A recent poll quoted in Charles Whitlock’s Easy Money, revealed 
that when people received telephone calls from a bogus investment company, one in twenty 
took the bait. The victims had no prior contact with the salesperson or the company, but 
still, five percent of them bought. But there was a catch. The poll also reported that, 
considering all those stung by a telephone fraud, only two percent of those calling 
themselves trusting, and just two percent of those who called themselves open-minded, had 
been the victims of fraud. Simply put, persons with healthy lives, strong family ties, and an 
honest work ethic are not as likely to get burned as people who are lonely, desperate, and out 
to make a quick buck. Of course, as our examples have shown, the range of people caught in 
pyramid schemes has no bounds. Plenty of victims are experienced, careful professionals 
who have either let down their guard or become ensnared by the cleverest of shams.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1750                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


ponzi and pyramid scheme
definit
a ponzi scheme is gener defin as an illeg busi practic in which new investor
monei is us to make payment to earlier investor a simpl invest scam rake in as
much monei as possibl and then disappear a ponzi stai in busi by turn some of
the monei back into the game a few conspicu reward earli on will whip up interest the
busi will grow and then if theyr smart and lucki the oper will split
everyon involv pretend to mount a legitim organ but littl or no commerci
activ take place payoff ar made from the pool of investor fund the rest is siphon
into oper pocket scheme mai run for at least a year some ponzi have flourish
for a decad or more
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11731
in account term monei paid to ponzi investor describ as incom is actual
distribut of capit it like give awai the store instead of share profit your share
cash reserv
approach thi crime analyt we can see into the mechan of the fraud illeg cash is
hidden in secur or other financi instrument promot us phoni account phoni
book and phoni name success prosecut have to uncov these guis and track the
fund plu the inner work of a ponzi oper have to be summar for a juri
whose member ar probabl not mathematician or account
madoff and stanford ponzi rise again
in earli 2009 ponzi scheme becam headlin new when bernard berni madoff plead
guilti to a 50 billion ponzi scheme the largest in us histori and r allen stanford wa
charg with run an 8 billion dollar ponzi
bernard berni madoff
introduct
on decemb 11 2008 feder bureau of investig agent arrest bernard
berni madoff a 70yearold businessman and former chairman of the nasdaq
stock market and charg him on a singl count of secur fraud accord to the
charg document the arrest came after madoff told two senior employe later identifi
as hi son that hi invest advisori busi wa basic a giant ponzi scheme
estim that investor lost approxim 50 billion in hi fraud feder prosecutor
howev put the amount at 648 billion
background
befor hi arrest madoff enjoi a sterl reput recogn as a financi
mastermind in 1960 madoff found hi invest compani bernard l madoff
invest secur llc with 5000 he earn from hi job as a lifeguard and a
sprinkler instal the busi eventu becam on of the five brokerdeal that
help creat the nasdaq stock exchang which madoff later chair and establish
itself as on of the top market maker busi on wall street the sixth largest in 2008
madoff wa also a wide respect philanthropist devot hi time and wealth to
numer charit caus he not onli establish hi own multimilliondollar privat
consum fraud financi transact
11732 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat that donat monei to educ cultur and health chariti he also serv
on the board of sever nonprofit institut
madoff invest scheme
even though it is not clear when madoff invest fraud began feder investig
believ the fraud mai have begun in the 1970 while madoff himself state that it began in
the 1990 it is clear that madoff unusu consist return show annual
return from eight to twelv percent were not the result of hi invest strategi
befor hi confess madoff claim that he gener the steadi return by emploi a
splitstrik convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that
involv a combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to
gener predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close
correl to an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put
option on the same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who request
withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund from
new invest to pai them off
how madoff made it happen
unlik most ponzi scheme which collaps in a few year as withdraw exce deposit
madoff con last longer spread farther and caus more loss than ani similar scheme
in histori understand the madoff case rais the question how did madoff fool so
mani peopl for so long of cours there is no singl answer to explain the success of
madoff scheme but there ar sever factor that contribut to it unusu prosper
includ hi abil to attract new investor maintain stabil and avoid detect these
ar explor in the follow section
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11733
attract new investor
madoff abil to attract new investor is on reason for hi scheme success for year
madoff scheme did not collaps becaus he successfulli rais enough monei from new
investor to keep pai return sever factor contribut to madoff s abil to entic
new investor most significantli report of solid longterm and lowrisk return
regardless of the market environ lure new investor through a fals sens of secur
unlik most ponzi scheme madoff did not promis extraordinari return instead he
promis stabil and longterm profit in other word madoff attract new investor by
avoid the appear of risk
similarli hi reput and profession statur provid comfort to hi investor as a
major figur in nasdaq a pioneer market maker and a govern advisor on
market issu madoff rsum wa except madoff also enjoi a longstand
reput as a modest and humbl individu a man who put hi famili first and donat
much of hi time and monei to sever charit caus
moreov madoff lure new investor by promot secreci and exploit the complex
inher to the industri madoff emphas secreci by keep hi investor and invest
strategi from the gener public which creat a sens of exclus and an enigmat
entic in hi invest account addition madoff understood that the complex
and cryptic natur of the secur industri caus investor to feel that it is a disciplin for
peopl who ar much smarter and he exploit thi by market hi splitstrik convers
invest method as too complic for outsid to understand these characterist
allow madoff to shift investor fear from the risk of lose monei to the risk that thei
might miss out on make monei creat an environ ripe for fraudul practic
maintain stabil
in addit to attract new investor some expert suggest that madoff successfulli
avoid larg unexpect withdraw that would lead to the collaps of hi scheme by
target wealthi individu and chariti sinc the wealthi feel ani econom downturn
last and least such investor provid madoff with the monei he need to keep hi scheme
go similarli professor mitchel zuckoff author of ponzi scheme the true stori of
a financi legend argu that by target chariti madoff could avoid the threat of
sudden or unexpect withdraw zuckoff sai that charit foundat ar legal
requir to spend onli five percent of their fund each year and that thi low rate of
withdraw allow madoff scheme to avoid detect as long as he attract new
investor
consum fraud financi transact
11734 2011 fraud examin manual
a void detect
despit multipl sec investig and alleg of fraud begin as earli as 1999
madoff invest scheme continu without detect there ar sever reason for thi
in particular he construct hi invest busi to avoid most regulatori oversight and
other check and balanc although privat invest pool such as hedg fund ar
subject to limit oversight madoff firm wa a differ kind of entiti unlik privat
invest pool which us an outsid brokerag firm to execut their trade madoff firm
wa a brokerdeal with an assetmanag divis allow the firm to process all of
it own trade similarli while most privat invest pool typic keep their client
fund or secur with an extern custodian madoff firm kept it fund inhous
essenti these practic help keep hi activ hidden from view
madoff also avoid the oblig to us a pcaobregist auditor by structur hi
firm as a privat held brokerdeal thi allow hi firm to us an unknown audit
firm with onli three employe on of whom wa a 78yearold live in florida and no
other larg wall street client
equal import is that madoff avoid file requir disclosur of hi firm hold
with the sec madoff did thi by sai that hi firm sold all of it hold for cash at
the end of everi report period
in addit to oper hi busi on the outskirt of regul madoff avoid
detect by discourag the us of prudent investor tool like due dilig audit
statement and understand of invest strategi notabl evid show that madoff
kick some investor out of hi fund for ask too mani question likewis madoff
reportedli shun question from invest media about hi strategi and as note
abov madoff conduct hi invest busi with great secreci and even refus to
provid client with onlin access to their account
red flag
with the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flag in madoff invest advisori
busi and if noth els the madoff saga can provid some simpl lesson to help
identifi and prevent similar ponzi scheme the most appar red flag ar discuss
below
steadi return
the most obviou red flag wa that madoff firm gener consist steadi posit
return dure hi seventeenyear track record with no down year and veri few neg
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11735
month regardless of market condit and even though madoff attribut thi to hi
splitstrik convers invest strategi a techniqu that can gener profit over mani
year thi type of strategi will gener some down month and exhibit more volatil than
madoff report return in other word madoff profit were too good to be true
extrem secreci and lack of transpar
madoff secreci and lack of transpar in the oper of hi busi and invest
process provid yet anoth red flag as disc uss abov report indic that madoff wa
extrem secret regard hi invest strategi specif madoff never clearli
defin hi splitstrik convers strategi which other trader could not duplic and he
refus to answer question ab out hi invest strategi in addit madoff did not
provid hi client with a high level of detail in their monthli statement and refus to
provid onlin access to their account
madoff also kept inform from other employe at hi firm accord to a senior
employe madoff kept the financi statement for the firm under lock and kei and wa
cryptic about hi invest advisori busin ess which he oper from a separ floor
when discuss it with other employe
lack of job segreg
the lack of job segreg wa anoth red flag that should have rais concern about
madoff oper unlik typic hedg fund that us a network of thirdparti servic
provid to perform certain function madoff firm perform these oper intern
and with no thirdparti oversight a hedg fund network of thirdparti servic provid
typic includ an invest manag to manag the asset a broker or broker to
manag the trade a fund administr and a custodianprim broker these third
parti provid essenti check and balanc necessari to protect individu and
institut madoff firm on the other hand perform these function intern madoff
not onli trade hi manag account inhous by oper as a brokerdeal he also
maintain custodi of hi client asset indic that there wa no independ custodian
to verifi the exist of asset
small account firm
on of the most signific red flag wa the firm unknown auditor friehl
horowitz a firm that emploi onli three peopl clearli it seem inconceiv that a
threeperson oper could adequ audit a firm of madoff size and complex
furthermor the account firm had onli on activ account david friehl who
had not regist with the pcaob an independ agenc that wa creat under the
consum fraud financi transact
11736 2011 fraud examin manual
sarbanesoxlei act to help detect fraud similarli the firm wa not peer review a
process in which audit organ assess each other for intern qualiti control
accord to the aicpa the account firm wa not requir to particip in ani peer
review becaus friehl inform the group that the firm had not conduct audit for 15
year
on march 18 2009 friehl becam the second person charg in the fraud scandal
accord to feder prosecutor friehl wa charg with secur fraud aid and
abet investmentadvisor fraud and for file fals audit report to the sec
unusu fee structur
the structur of the firm compens also rais red flag unlik most hedg fund
which charg manag and perform fee madoff firm earn commiss on each
trade thi unusu fee structur rais mani question why would the firm not act like a
hedg fund and profit from big gain why would it let thirdparti distributor get these
fee
tip from more than on sourc
final outsid analyst rais critic question about madoff firm for year for
exampl in 2001 an articl that appear on the marhedg websit titl madoff
top chart skeptic ask how serious question madoff abil to deliv
incred consist return a subsequ barron articl titl dont ask dont
tell rais the same concern note that some on wall street remain skeptic about
how madoff achiev such stun doubledigit return
still the most notabl critiqu came from independ fraud investig harri
markopolo cfe cfa in 1999 markopolo start a campaign to persuad the
sec that madoff return could not be legal gener us the invest strategi
that he claim to us despit receiv littl attent markopolo continu to send
sec offici inform about madoff and in 2005 markopolo present the sec
with a 17page memo titl the world largest hedg fund is a fraud in the memo
markopolo outlin 29 red flag in madoff busi deal and argu that madoff
wa either frontrun client order or oper the world largest ponzi scheme thi
time the sec respond to markopoloss tip and initi an investig
unfortun the investig did not uncov ani evid of a ponzi scheme
final sever financi institut includ goldman sach group inc and credit
suiss group ag either refus to do busi with madoff or advis their custom
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11737
against it in fact goldman sach blacklist madoff firm after it fail to pass their
standard of due dilig
conclus
in 2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud
on count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he
wa sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion
dollar the amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi given the size scope and
complex involv in the fraud the process of unravel madoff web of financi
deal could take year and the full extent of the damag caus by hi scheme mai never
be known
secur and exchang commiss v stanford intern bank et al
r allen stanford a promin financi philanthropist and sponsor of sport team had
been on the radar of regul for year thank to the oddli stabl and gener return
offer by hi firm certif of deposit but recent the secur and exchang
commiss sec perhap inspir by madoff alleg 50 billion ponzi scheme took
a renew interest in stanford and hi oper on februari 27 2009 the sec file
a complaint alleg that stanford three of hi compani and two of hi execut carri
out a massiv ponzi scheme for at least a decad involv billion of dollar of investor
fund
the parti
plaintiff
secur and exchang commiss sec
defend
stanford intern bank ltd sib
stanford group compani sgcinvest advis to sib
stanford capit manag llc scginvest advis to sib
r allen stanford stanfordchairman chief execut offic and sole sharehold of
the stanford oper
jame m davi davisdirector and chief financi offic of sfg and sib
laura pendergestholt pendergestholtc hief invest offic of sfg and a
member of sib invest committe
consum fraud financi transact
11738 2011 fraud examin manual
relief defend
stanford financi group sfg
the stanford financi gr oup bldg inc sfgb
the alleg
the secur and exchang commiss file a number of alleg against the
defend in it first amend complaint file on februari 27 2009 with the us
district court for the northern district of texa dalla divis these alleg
includ
stanford and davi misappropri billion of dollar of investor fund and
falsifi sib financi statement in an effort to conceal their ponzi scheme
pendergestholt facilit the scheme by misrepres to investor that she
manag sib multibillion invest portfolio of asset and emploi a sizabl
team of analyst to monitor the portfolio
sib sold approxim 8 billion of certif of deposit cd through
deceiv investor about the secur of the cd and the asset in which the bank
wa invest
stanford and davi invest an undetermin amount of investor fund in
specul unprofit privat busi control by stanford
stanford and davi fabric the perform of sib invest portfolio in
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor fund flow in the fabric
financi inform in no wai reveal the true perform of the bank
invest portfolio
sgc and scm advis us materi fals and mislead histor
perform data to sell more than 1 billion of a proprietari mutual fund wrap
program gener fee for sgc and scm in excess of 25 million
the defend violat or aid and abet violat of the secur act of
1933 the secur exchang act of 1934 the invest advisor act of
1940 and the invest compani act of 1940
the red flag
despit be such an opaqu oper oper in a minim regul jurisdict
and offer suspici stabl return on it invest sib did an excel job of
attract investor and field regul for quit some time and whether or not
stanford is guilti of run the alleg 8 billion ponzi scheme remain to be seen but
regardless of the outcom of the case on cannot deni the exist of a number of warn
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11739
sign indic of a ponzi scheme or other invest fraud the red flag discuss below
should have had investor and regul intrigu if not downright apprehens
impress yet oddli stabl return
sib purport to achiev doubledigit return on it invest for the past 15 year not
onli were the return oddli stabl but thei were quit impress especi for such a
liquid invest often more than doubl the return offer by big bank for exampl
the interest rate offer by sib in februari 2009 on a oneyear cd requir a 50000
minimum invest in the unit state wa approxim 45 accord to the
bank websit while bankratecom report the averag interest rate offer by us
bank to be about 2 even more interest is that despit massiv loss in the stock
market and hedg fund in 2008 sib claim to experi a loss of onli 13 for that
period and continu to pai out aboveaverag return
opaqu invest strategi
there wa a stun lack of transpar into the invest strategi us by sib the
bank claim to gener it impress return by invest the cd monei larg in
corpor stock real estat hedg fund and preciou metal but offer few specif even
in it annual report sib strategi is a bit unusu as most issuer of cd invest cd
monei in higheryield us treasuri bond or similarli conserv instrument
market materi claim that the bank wa abl to offer substanti higher return as
a result of invest in a welldiversifi portfolio of highli market secur issu by
stabl govern strong multin compani and major intern bank and
also as a result of antigua low tax and moder overhead cost
incred small audit firm
the 14person antiguabas account firm ca hewlett co seem grossli
inadequ to audit the book of a bank that claim to manag and advis 50 billion in
investor fund but that who stanford reli upon for hi audit need
inbr govern structur
the independ and object of the bank board of director were question given
that the sevenmemb board wa domin by stanford insid famili and friend
veri high level of spend
although sell cd is typic a lowmargin busi stanford wa abl to offer much
higher than averag compens to broker includ larg bonus luxuri car and
expens vacat stanford empir wa also known to spend vast sum of monei on it
consum fraud financi transact
11740 2011 fraud examin manual
mani offic addition stanford compani were a big corpor sponsor of
profession sport team and charit caus and thei contribut heavili to polit
campaign
unusu background of chief invest offic
the qualif of pendergestholt the chief invest offic of sfg and a member of
sib invest committe ar insuffici to explain her meteor rise to the top of
stanford empir she did not have a busi school degre nor did she have ani
experi as an analyst at a wall street firm or larg mutual fund compani all of her
train wa receiv on the job while work for stanford
concern voic by a number of former brokersemploye
over the year there have been a number of grievanc includ lawsuit and public
arbitr case air against sfg and sib by former employe and broker includ
claim that the firm were run a ponzi or pyramid scheme claim that
employeesbrok were dismiss for object to and rais concern about the legal of
the firm practic claim that the firm us investor monei to financ it brokerag arm
and claim that the firm misl investor by offer artifici high yield on their cd
revoc of bank licens in montserrat
prior to stanford intern bank stanford oper guardian intern bank
which also issu question cd in the british territori of montserrat in the
caribbean but in 1991 after the local govern move to revok guardian bank
licens under hazi circumst stanford reloc to antigua and renam hi bank
stanford intern bank
at the time of thi write the onli charg against stanford and davi were civil fraud
charg pendergestholt howev had been arrest by feder prosecutor and charg
with crimin obstruct of justic to which she plead innoc for give mislead
statement to sec investig perhap prosecutor hope to secur a quick guilti plea
from her so that with a plea deal in hand thei can us her as a wit against stanford
and davi regardless of the outcom of the case investor should be wari ani time thei
come across a yield far higher than averag with no clear plausibl and legal explan
illeg pyramid or ponzi scheme
what the differ between an illeg pyramid scheme and a ponzi scheme thei both
us new investor monei to make payoff but theyr run veri differ by their
promot and legal theyr prosecut under differ law
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11741
first well distinguish between legal and illeg pyramid scheme then well show how a
ponzi scheme and an illeg pyramid ar the same thing onli differ
pyramid scheme legal and illeg
illeg pyramid gener revenu by continu recruit new member these oper
mai offer merchandis or servic for sale but the onli signific revenu come from
recruit
some legitim merchandis compani us a pyramid structur to rank their employeeown
and to determin those peopl compens but a pyramid structur becom a
pyramid scheme when the compani make it monei by recruit peopl instead of sell
a product or servic the group deal primarili in new membership join the group allow
the new member to profit by sign up new member the process continu until the
avail pool of new member is drain which happen sooner than on might think
usual there a product or a caus that front the illeg pyramid scheme as a legitim
enterpris promot shill beeswax supplement or claim theyr work to prevent youth
crime a favorit product front offer cours in area like investor educ or self
esteem these materi usual convei veri littl pertin inform in fact theyr
noth more than motiv tract design to make the victim a more enthusiast
particip in the pyramid
in ani case regardless of the product front an illeg pyramid emphas recruit first and
foremost the product or servic take a back seat to get new sucker sign up
as a rule of thumb most court appli the 70 percent rule thi requir that at least 70
percent of distributor profit come from retail sale of cours thi figur can be hard to
verifi distributor routin sign falsifi complianc statement becaus if thei dont
promot warn the author will shut the whole thing down and everyon lose
in the final assess legal rest on what the oper emphas if the compani
emphas the recruit of new member over the sale of product and if the onli wai
to recogn promis rich is through recruit then the oper will like be
classifi as an illeg pyramid
consum fraud financi transact
11742 2011 fraud examin manual
what the differ between an illeg pyramid and a ponzi scheme
illeg pyramid ar promot as pyramid ponzi scheme ar promot as invest
opportun
the kei element in a ponzi scheme is that initi investor ar paid with subsequ
investor monei there is litl or no legitim commerc
the same thing occur in an illeg pyramid nobodi sell the beeswax supplement
theyr all coax new peopl to put up monei the origin member of the pyramid get
rich on subsequ investor monei so a pyramid is a ponzi scheme
how about the obvers is a ponzi scheme a pyramid the distinguish factor of the
illeg pyramid is the continu need for new investor each new member recruit two
member who each recruit two and so forth
ponzi scheme like pyramid requir a steadi march of new investor fund to pai
dividend thi evergrow pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graph so in the
sens that it requir exponenti growth to avoid collaps a ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme
the differ between a ponzi and a pyramid li in how the oper is promot
illeg pyramid announc themselv as pyramid thei hype level or stage in their literatur
the pyramid structur help draw new player each believ that thei will rise through
the rank of the pyramid to becom golden or fulli vestedwhatev hokei titl the
scammer have concoct
a ponzi scheme on the other hand masquerad as some type of invest in financi
instrument miner right or some other form of specul the particip believ
theyr bui mortgageback secur or partial interest in an oil well thei have no idea
theyr funnel monei into a bottomless pit certainli no on suggest move on to the
next level of the pyramid becaus the pyramid isnt part of the pitch
when an enterprisenuskin intern for exampl promot itself as an
organ with level or stage and the onli wai to rise through the level is to recruit
new member the promot ar run an illeg pyramid scheme befor tim and
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11743
melinda rommel su nuskin thei were true believ sprinkl nuskin product across
their bathroom and kitchen serv splash nuskin answer to tang for breakfast everi
dai and even redecor their hous at the behest of nuskin consult all for the
purpos of snare new recruit the rommel su becaus thei were misl about their
opportun insid the organ thei knew all along thei were join a pyramid thei
just thought it wa a legal on
when an enterpris promot an invest opportun that invest littl or none of the
particip monei and that us new invest dollar to make dividend payment the
promot ar run a ponzi scheme
distinguish between ponzi and pyramid seem a bit academ but the differ
becom signific when perpetr ar brought to justic to prosecut an illeg pyramid
the enforc team need to show that the offend gener revenu mainli through
recruitmentth compani pyramid structur is an element of the charg pyramid
scheme ar sometim charg as illeg lotteri becaus prosecutor have successfulli
argu the particip ar total depend on the action of other for ani compens
in anoth prosecut strategi oper ar charg with fals repres potenti
earn sinc the mathemat limit of the pyramid make the promis 10000 a month
imposs or extrem against the odd again the pyramid structur itself is an issu in
the case
in summari
if oper make the bulk of particip earn depend on recruit and
emphas level and stage in their promot we call thi an illeg pyramid
if oper claim theyr offer an invest opportun but conduct littl or no
commerci activ we call thi a ponzi scheme
categori of ponzi scheme
ponzi scheme ar classifi accord to the front us in their promot the categori
ar pure cash which includ endless chain scheme and fillandsplit game and product front
which includ financi instrument mlm and specul
consum fraud financi transact
11744 2011 fraud examin manual
pure cash scheme
there ar two gener type of pure cash scheme endless chain and fillandsplit game
endless chain
the most outrag pyramid scam dont bother to hide their stripe thei dont us
servic or product to establish their legitimaci instead thei us the chain letter
approach the recipi of the letter send a sum of monei 5 50 100 the amount vari
but isnt usual veri larg to the person who mail them the letter then pass the letter
on to three or four other
probabl studi have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the player in a pyramid everyon
but those at the earliest initi will lose most of their monei fulli half can expect to lose
everyth thei put in
some internet chain have becom known as administ pyramid scheme everi
exchang in the chain is monitor by a central administr who make sure everybodi
plai and pai along the administr take a cut of each transact
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11745
fillandsplit game
the best wai to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with game element some kind
of hook to keep player attent focus on their rich and not how stupid their latest
opportun realli is these ar sometim call fillandsplit game a popular version
of thi approach ha been known as airplan each player bui a seat on a fictiti
airplan pai from 200 to 2000 a seat depend on the scale of the game initi
player help recruit new passeng and move up through the rank of crew copilot
and pilot when a flight is fulli book with someth like six passeng four crew
member a copilot and a pilot the plane take off the pilot and crew ar paid for the
flight and everybodi move up the rank just like a real airlin a plane investor ar
constantli look to fill their seat
anoth variat of the fillandsplit game tri to capit on the phenomen profit
yield over the last 15 year by the american stock market call financi network
market climb or anoth financialsound name these pure cash pyramid us a busi
metaphor in their pitch a typic oper spread 15 peopl over four level eight investor
bui into the network as vicepresid abov them ar four presid just below two
cochairman posit at the top sit pretti is the chairman everi time the eight slot
at the bottom ar fill averag price 1500 to 2000 the pyramid split the chairman get
out of the game with a golden parachut and everyon move up the corpor ladder
anxious scan for new recruit
these game ar usual predic on what becom known as affin fraud new player
ar recruit by their affin with exist particip peopl comb religi group or
commun associ for fresh lead affin mai be racial or cultur financi
network for exampl ha target a number of africanamerican commun
church synagogu and other religi organ offer fertil hunt ground and
great cover from promotersan endors from a clergyperson is as good as gold and
law enforc author ar often reluct to meddl in religi affair affin fraud
mai also prei on social group or profession organ
product front
the categori of product front is subdivid into financi instrument mlm and
specul
consum fraud financi transact
11746 2011 fraud examin manual
financi instrument
financi instrument such as stock borrow certif currenc exchang loan
scam and invest poolsar perfect tool for the ponzi artist charl ponzi victim
in 1920 thought thei were invest in postal repli coupon that ponzi assur everyon
yield whop profit by plai off the exchang rate of intern currenc in our
own time as legal tender in mexico brazil and asia rollercoast from on extrem to the
next the currenc exchang still make an ideal ponzi front
a stock market that gain 25 to 30 percent a year and individu stock quadrupl
sometim in a matter of month encourag the impress that all anyon ha to do is put
down their monei and wait by the mailbox unscrupul promot like to tout new item
like internet stock and biotechnolog startup but ani product will do even in thi wire
ag commod futuresfrom soybean to pork belliesar still number among the
most common bait for ponzi scheme
financi instrument ar especi effect front becaus most peopl dont understand
how legitim financi oper take place when wall street is set aflutt by
deriv of futur contract and hedg fund ar bet that the market will rise at the
same time theyr bet it will fall how is an averag investor with 20000 suppos to
understand hi option
multilevel market
when most peopl hear about a pyramid scheme thei think multilevel market or mlm
as it often abbrevi these organ hawk nutrit supplement household good
cosmet televis antenna insur long distanc phone servic everyth from
antiqu to zinc also among the offer might be copi of how to make a million dollar in
an mlm on of the industri monster monei maker is a string of train materi
design to pump the sale forc into ever higher feat of huckstership
math remain the great enemi as well as the prime tool of mlm promot scratch
matric never pyramid on a chalkboard and comput what 20 peopl mail monei to a
distributor hous everi month would amount to in a year time these shiller ignor
other aspect of the equat first the market for ani product outsid those own by larg
nation brand is extrem small cash in on a submarket requir an excess of savvi
financ and luck which most mlmer lack in spade then there pyramid
mathemat after a coupl of level you ru n out of peopl will to hear your spiel
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11747
which wa alreadi less than 5 percent of ani area popul in fact between 90 and 95
percent of mlm oper fail in their first two year compar to a 7080 percent failur
rate for small busi in gener
as a rule of thumb ani organ that recruit distributor into a pyramidstyl
compens plan offer big payoff for recruit sai more than 100 per recruit and
spend more time trumpet it distributor level than it product line is probabl illeg
specul
for the purpos of thi cours the term specul describ ani invest proposit not
cover as financi instrument or mlm thi includ franchis offer and busi
opportun in gener workathom promot and invest in area like real estat
or miner right these ar good oldfashion invest except when theyr ponzi
scheme
franchis scam hawk such opportun as pai phone busi or vend machin by
their natur such busi ar spread out geograph and dont involv much direct
contact with the promot and the franchis holder
workathom promot ar also favorit tool of the franchis scammer comput
technolog is a popular front sinc thousand of peopl realli ar set up busi from
their home a few earli dividend check per the ponzi playbook ar often enough to
overcom a client hesit and provok a more sizeabl invest then the promot
can fold up and move to anoth state or anoth coast
bigmonei specul often base their highflown claim in the ground beneath our feet
land and the miner drawn from it like gold coal and oil ha ancient been regard as
the ultim commod the ground is the fundament of everi human endeavor so perhap
the land swindl is also the fundament of fraud someon somewher it seem ha alwai
been sell flood lot to homestead salt gold mine with chunk of pyrit or
assur a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acr of desert he
just bought for a song
obvious a commerci environ that thrive on specul is ripe for ponzi fraud
rememb the ponzi element in a ponzi scheme is onli a techniqu give back a few
dollar to sweeten the pot anyth that can coax peopl to part with their monei from
consum fraud financi transact
11748 2011 fraud examin manual
emu farm to underwat land develop can be run as a ponzi all the name ponzi
realli mean is that a few mark get paid thi lend a competit element to an otherwis
runofthemil fraud instead of everyon lose some lucki player do make monei
specul fraud dont alwai start out as con but when their rollercoast dip mani
specul find it too tempt to hang on and ride thei figur thei can phoni their wai
through the crisi and pick up again later again it math that usual doom these player
thei simpli cant make monei fast enough to feed the deficit thei need a payoff so big
noth short of a miracl or more fraud will suffic
specul can quickli get caught in a chain reaction where each fraud demand more
fraud by the time these organ ar shut down theyr spend half of their resourc
or more just cover up their crimin act
spot pyramid scheme
almost everyon know what a pyramid scheme is peopl see them expos on televis
and read about them constantli in magazin and newspap so if everyon is so well
inform about the pyramid how doe it surviv
it could be that familiar ha lull the public into a fals sens of secur pyramid have
sever strong weapon at their dispos
thei do pai off unlik a simpl con game in which the fraudster throw the ruse grab
the cash and exit pyramid build up the take by pai initi investor thi make
for excel testimoni earli player circul the word and bring in new mark initi
payoff also keep earli player come back payoff make the enterpris look legitim
and fuel the expans process charl phillip elliot ran hi invest busi
pyramidstyl for 16 year take in more than 60 million from 1100 investor when
elliot wa bust a busi associ quip elliot paid like a slot machin he lull
everyon to sleep 2
thei oper mainli through preexist affili commun group religi
organ and social club all make entic target for pyramid ani pyramid
requir a healthi pool of particip so a larg group alreadi gather togeth is ideal
besid that pyramid know how to manipul the trust that peopl place in these
group
2 holzman todd busi datelin octob 1987 page 16ff
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11749
thei us ingenu and fals logic in their pitch the product front avail for
pyramid ar myriad from bath soap to electron front in financi instrument
and real estat ar especi effect becaus most peopl dont understand how those
busi work anywai pure cash game find clever metaphorslik a conceptu
airplan or a busi execut hierarchi to make themselv attract
pyramid of everi stripe us a seduct though fals logic in their pitch everybodi ha
friend and associ you onli have to sign up three or four peopl below you of cours
the law of mathemat spell doom to thi logic there simpli arent enough player to keep
even a small pyramid run three peopl each find three peopl will quickli plai out
their avail friend and associ if not mathemat then social there also a
reason limit on how quickli monei can grow
the pyramid then is built to overcom peopl most common misgiv about invest
promot offer far more than an undertak of great advantag nobodi to know what it
is thei ar veri specif in their prospectu the offer sound good and within it own
logic make sens the opportun is usual pitch by someon familiar to the victim
or at least by someon with an affin the victim trust most importantli the pyramid doe
return peopl monei with the incred profit attach as promis
speed is anoth potent weapon in the pyramid arsen con sai get in now or regret it
forev thei dont have time becaus of market demand or commit elsewher
for the person to check out the deal that becaus a moder amount of due dilig
research will expos the deal as a scheme
the final factor is greed a recent poll quot in charl whitlock easi monei reveal
that when peopl receiv telephon call from a bogu invest compani on in twenti
took the bait the victim had no prior contact with the salesperson or the compani but
still five percent of them bought but there wa a catch the poll also report that
consid all those stung by a telephon fraud onli two percent of those call
themselv trust and just two percent of those who call themselv openmind had
been the victim of fraud simpli put person with healthi live strong famili ti and an
honest work ethic ar not as like to get burn as peopl who ar lone desper and out
to make a quick buck of cours as our exampl have shown the rang of peopl caught in
pyramid scheme ha no bound plenti of victim ar experienc care profession
who have either let down their guard or becom ensnar by the cleverest of sham
consum fraud financi transact
11750 2011 fraud examin manual
