2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Definition


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Definition 
A Ponzi scheme is generally defined as an illegal business practice in which new investors’ 
money is used to make payments to earlier investors. A simple investment scam rakes in as 
much money as possible and then disappears. A Ponzi stays in business by turning some of 
the money back into the game. A few conspicuous rewards early on will whip up interest, the 
business will grow, and then, if they’re smart and lucky, the operators will split. 
 
Everyone involved pretends to mount a legitimate organization, but little or no commercial 
activity takes place. Payoffs are made from the pool of investor funds; the rest is siphoned 
into operators’ pockets. Schemes may run for at least a year. Some Ponzis have flourished 
for a decade or more.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1731 
In accounting terms, money paid to Ponzi investors, described as income, is actually  
distribution of capital. It’s like giving away the store. Instead of sharing profits, you’re sharing 
cash reserves. 
 
Approaching this crime analytically we can see into the mechanics of the fraud. Illegal cash is 
hidden in securities or other financial instruments. Promoters use phony accounts, phony 
books, and phony names. Successful prosecutions have to uncover these guises and track the 
funds. Plus, the inner workings of a Ponzi operation have to be summarized for a jury, 
whose members are probably not mathematicians or accountants.  
 



:


definit
a ponzi scheme is gener defin as an illeg busi practic in which new investor
monei is us to make payment to earlier investor a simpl invest scam rake in as
much monei as possibl and then disappear a ponzi stai in busi by turn some of
the monei back into the game a few conspicu reward earli on will whip up interest the
busi will grow and then if theyr smart and lucki the oper will split
everyon involv pretend to mount a legitim organ but littl or no commerci
activ take place payoff ar made from the pool of investor fund the rest is siphon
into oper pocket scheme mai run for at least a year some ponzi have flourish
for a decad or more
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11731
in account term monei paid to ponzi investor describ as incom is actual
distribut of capit it like give awai the store instead of share profit your share
cash reserv
approach thi crime analyt we can see into the mechan of the fraud illeg cash is
hidden in secur or other financi instrument promot us phoni account phoni
book and phoni name success prosecut have to uncov these guis and track the
fund plu the inner work of a ponzi oper have to be summar for a juri
whose member ar probabl not mathematician or account
