2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Pure Cash Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Pure Cash Schemes 
There are two general types of pure cash schemes: endless chains and fill-and-split games. 
 
ENDLESS CHAINS 
The most outrageous pyramid scams don’t bother to hide their stripes. They don’t use 
services or products to establish their legitimacy. Instead they use the “chain letter” 
approach. The recipient of the letter sends a sum of money ($5, $50, $100, the amount varies 
but isn’t usually very large) to the person who mailed them the letter, then passes the letter 
on to three or four others.  
 
Probability studies have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the players in a pyramid (everyone 
but those at the earliest initiation) will lose most of their money. Fully half can expect to lose 
everything they put in.  
 
Some Internet chains have become known as “administered” pyramid schemes — every 
exchange in the chain is monitored by a central administrator, who makes sure everybody’s 
playing (and paying) along. The administrator takes a cut of each transaction.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1745 
FILL-AND-SPLIT GAMES 
The best way to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with gaming elements, some kind 
of hook to keep players’ attention focused on their riches and not how stupid their latest 
“opportunity” really is. These are sometimes called “fill-and-split games.” A popular version 
of this approach has been known as “Airplane.” Each player buys a seat on a fictitious 
airplane, paying from $200 to $2,000 a seat, depending on the scale of the game. Initial 
players help recruit new “passengers” and move up through the ranks of “crew,” “copilot,” 
and “pilot.” When a flight is fully booked — with something like six passengers, four crew 
members, a copilot, and a pilot — the plane takes off, the pilots and crew are paid for the 
flight, and everybody moves up the ranks. Just like a real airline, a plane’s investors are 
constantly looking to fill their seats.  
 
Another variation of the fill-and-split game tries to capitalize on the phenomenal profits 
yielded over the last 15 years by the American stock market. Called “Financial Networking,” 
“Market Climb,” or another financial-sounding name, these pure cash pyramids use a business 
metaphor in their pitch. A typical operation spreads 15 people over four levels. Eight investors 
buy into the network as “vice-presidents”; above them are four “presidents,” just below two 
“cochairman” positions; at the top, sitting pretty, is the “chairman.” Every time the eight slots 
at the bottom are filled (average price $1,500 to $2,000), the pyramid splits. The chairman gets 
out of the game with a “golden parachute” and everyone moves up the corporate ladder, 
anxiously scanning for new recruits.  
 
These games are usually predicated on what’s become known as affinity fraud. New players 
are recruited by their affinity with existing participants. People comb religious groups or 
community associations for fresh leads. Affinities may be racial or cultural. Financial 
networking, for example, has targeted a number of African-American communities. 
Churches, synagogues, and other religious organizations offer fertile hunting grounds and 
great cover from promoters—an endorsement from a clergyperson is as good as gold, and 
law enforcement authorities are often reluctant to meddle in religious affairs. Affinity frauds 
may also prey on social groups or professional organizations.  
 



:


pure cash scheme
there ar two gener type of pure cash scheme endless chain and fillandsplit game
endless chain
the most outrag pyramid scam dont bother to hide their stripe thei dont us
servic or product to establish their legitimaci instead thei us the chain letter
approach the recipi of the letter send a sum of monei 5 50 100 the amount vari
but isnt usual veri larg to the person who mail them the letter then pass the letter
on to three or four other
probabl studi have shown that 93 to 95 percent of the player in a pyramid everyon
but those at the earliest initi will lose most of their monei fulli half can expect to lose
everyth thei put in
some internet chain have becom known as administ pyramid scheme everi
exchang in the chain is monitor by a central administr who make sure everybodi
plai and pai along the administr take a cut of each transact
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11745
fillandsplit game
the best wai to launch a pure cash pyramid is to jazz it up with game element some kind
of hook to keep player attent focus on their rich and not how stupid their latest
opportun realli is these ar sometim call fillandsplit game a popular version
of thi approach ha been known as airplan each player bui a seat on a fictiti
airplan pai from 200 to 2000 a seat depend on the scale of the game initi
player help recruit new passeng and move up through the rank of crew copilot
and pilot when a flight is fulli book with someth like six passeng four crew
member a copilot and a pilot the plane take off the pilot and crew ar paid for the
flight and everybodi move up the rank just like a real airlin a plane investor ar
constantli look to fill their seat
anoth variat of the fillandsplit game tri to capit on the phenomen profit
yield over the last 15 year by the american stock market call financi network
market climb or anoth financialsound name these pure cash pyramid us a busi
metaphor in their pitch a typic oper spread 15 peopl over four level eight investor
bui into the network as vicepresid abov them ar four presid just below two
cochairman posit at the top sit pretti is the chairman everi time the eight slot
at the bottom ar fill averag price 1500 to 2000 the pyramid split the chairman get
out of the game with a golden parachut and everyon move up the corpor ladder
anxious scan for new recruit
these game ar usual predic on what becom known as affin fraud new player
ar recruit by their affin with exist particip peopl comb religi group or
commun associ for fresh lead affin mai be racial or cultur financi
network for exampl ha target a number of africanamerican commun
church synagogu and other religi organ offer fertil hunt ground and
great cover from promotersan endors from a clergyperson is as good as gold and
law enforc author ar often reluct to meddl in religi affair affin fraud
mai also prei on social group or profession organ
