2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Product Fronts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Product Fronts 
The category of product fronts is subdivided into financial instruments, MLMs, and 
speculations. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1746                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 
Financial instruments — such as stocks, borrower’s certificates, currency exchanges, loan 
scams, and investment pools—are perfect tools for the Ponzi artist. Charles Ponzi’s victims 
in 1920 thought they were investing in postal reply coupons that, Ponzi assured everyone, 
yielded whopping profits by playing off the exchange rates of international currency. In our 
own time, as legal tender in Mexico, Brazil, and Asia roller-coasters from one extreme to the 
next, the currency exchange still makes an ideal Ponzi front.  
 
A stock market that gains 25 to 30 percent a year (and individual stocks quadrupling, 
sometimes in a matter of months) encourages the impression that all anyone has to do is put 
down their money and wait by the mailbox. Unscrupulous promoters like to tout new items 
like Internet stocks and biotechnology startups, but any product will do. Even in this wired 
age, commodities futures—from soybeans to pork bellies—are still numbered among the 
most common bait for Ponzi schemes. 
 
Financial instruments are especially effective fronts because most people don’t understand 
how legitimate financial operations take place. When Wall Street is set a-fluttering by 
derivatives of futures contracts, and hedge funds are betting that the market will rise at the 
same time they’re betting it will fall, how is  an average investor with $20,000 supposed to 
understand his options?  
 
MULTILEVEL MARKETING 
When most people hear about a pyramid scheme, they think multilevel marketing, or MLM 
as it’s often abbreviated. These organizations hawk nutrition supplements, household goods, 
cosmetics, television antennas, insurance, long distance phone service, everything from 
antiques to zinc. Also among the offerings might be copies of How to Make a Million Dollars in 
an MLM. One of the industry’s monster money makers is a string of “training materials” 
designed to pump the sales force into ever higher feats of huckstership.  
 
Math remains the great enemy, as well as the prime tool, of MLMs. Promoters scratch 
matrices (never pyramids) on a chalkboard, and compute what 20 people mailing money to a 
distributor’s house every month would amount to in a year’s time. These shillers ignore 
other aspects of the equation. First, the market for any product outside those owned by large 
national brands is extremely small. Cashing in on a submarket requires an excess of savvy, 
finance, and luck, which most MLM-ers lack in spades. Then there’s pyramidal 
mathematics — after a couple of levels, you ru n out of people willing to hear your spiel 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1747 
(which was already less than 5 percent of any area’s population). In fact, between 90 and 95 
percent of MLM operations fail in their first two years (compared to a 70-80 percent failure 
rate for small businesses in general).  
 
As a rule of thumb, any organization that recruits distributors into a pyramid-style 
compensation plan, offers big payoffs for recruiting (say, more than $100 per recruit), and 
spends more time trumpeting its distributor levels than its product lines, is probably illegal.  
 
SPECULATIONS 
For the purpose of this course, the term speculation describes any investment proposition not 
covered as financial instruments or MLMs. This includes franchise offerings and business 
opportunities in general, work-at-home promotions, and investments in areas like real estate 
or mineral rights. These are good old-fashioned investments, except when they’re Ponzi 
schemes. 
 
Franchise scams hawk such opportunities as pay phone businesses or vending machines. By 
their nature, such businesses are spread out geographically and don’t involve much direct 
contact with the promoter and the franchise holder.  
 
Work-at-home promotions are also favorite tools of the franchise scammer. Computer 
technology is a popular front, since thousands of people really are setting up businesses from 
their homes. A few early dividend checks, per the Ponzi playbook, are often enough to 
overcome a client’s hesitation and provoke a more sizeable investment. Then the promoters 
can fold up and move to another state, or another coast.  
 
Big-money speculations often base their high-flown claims in the ground beneath our feet. 
Land, and the minerals drawn from it like gold, coal, and oil, has anciently been regarded as 
the ultimate commodity. The ground is the fundament of every human endeavor so, perhaps 
the land swindle is also the fundament of fraud. Someone, somewhere, it seems, has always 
been selling flooded lots to homesteaders, salting gold mines with chunks of pyrite, or 
assuring a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acres of desert he 
just bought for a song. 
 
Obviously, a commercial environment that thrives on speculation is ripe for Ponzi fraud. 
Remember, the Ponzi element in a Ponzi scheme is only a technique — giving back a few 
dollars to sweeten the pot. Anything that can coax people to part with their money, from 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1748                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
emu farms to underwater land developments, can be run as a Ponzi. All the name Ponzi 
really means is that a few marks get paid. This lends a competitive element to an otherwise 
run-of-the-mill fraud. Instead of everyone losing, some lucky players do make money. 
 
Speculations frauds don’t always start out as cons, but when their rollercoaster dips, many 
speculators find it too tempting to hang on and ride — they figure they can phony their way 
through the crisis, and pick up again later. Again, it’s math that usually dooms these players. 
They simply can’t make money fast enough to feed the deficits. They need a payoff so big 
nothing short of a miracle — or more fraud — will suffice. 
 
Speculators can quickly get caught in a chain reaction, where each fraud demands more 
fraud. By the time these organizations are shut down, they’re spending half of their resources 
or more just covering up their criminal acts.  
 



:


product front
the categori of product front is subdivid into financi instrument mlm and
specul
consum fraud financi transact
11746 2011 fraud examin manual
financi instrument
financi instrument such as stock borrow certif currenc exchang loan
scam and invest poolsar perfect tool for the ponzi artist charl ponzi victim
in 1920 thought thei were invest in postal repli coupon that ponzi assur everyon
yield whop profit by plai off the exchang rate of intern currenc in our
own time as legal tender in mexico brazil and asia rollercoast from on extrem to the
next the currenc exchang still make an ideal ponzi front
a stock market that gain 25 to 30 percent a year and individu stock quadrupl
sometim in a matter of month encourag the impress that all anyon ha to do is put
down their monei and wait by the mailbox unscrupul promot like to tout new item
like internet stock and biotechnolog startup but ani product will do even in thi wire
ag commod futuresfrom soybean to pork belliesar still number among the
most common bait for ponzi scheme
financi instrument ar especi effect front becaus most peopl dont understand
how legitim financi oper take place when wall street is set aflutt by
deriv of futur contract and hedg fund ar bet that the market will rise at the
same time theyr bet it will fall how is an averag investor with 20000 suppos to
understand hi option
multilevel market
when most peopl hear about a pyramid scheme thei think multilevel market or mlm
as it often abbrevi these organ hawk nutrit supplement household good
cosmet televis antenna insur long distanc phone servic everyth from
antiqu to zinc also among the offer might be copi of how to make a million dollar in
an mlm on of the industri monster monei maker is a string of train materi
design to pump the sale forc into ever higher feat of huckstership
math remain the great enemi as well as the prime tool of mlm promot scratch
matric never pyramid on a chalkboard and comput what 20 peopl mail monei to a
distributor hous everi month would amount to in a year time these shiller ignor
other aspect of the equat first the market for ani product outsid those own by larg
nation brand is extrem small cash in on a submarket requir an excess of savvi
financ and luck which most mlmer lack in spade then there pyramid
mathemat after a coupl of level you ru n out of peopl will to hear your spiel
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11747
which wa alreadi less than 5 percent of ani area popul in fact between 90 and 95
percent of mlm oper fail in their first two year compar to a 7080 percent failur
rate for small busi in gener
as a rule of thumb ani organ that recruit distributor into a pyramidstyl
compens plan offer big payoff for recruit sai more than 100 per recruit and
spend more time trumpet it distributor level than it product line is probabl illeg
specul
for the purpos of thi cours the term specul describ ani invest proposit not
cover as financi instrument or mlm thi includ franchis offer and busi
opportun in gener workathom promot and invest in area like real estat
or miner right these ar good oldfashion invest except when theyr ponzi
scheme
franchis scam hawk such opportun as pai phone busi or vend machin by
their natur such busi ar spread out geograph and dont involv much direct
contact with the promot and the franchis holder
workathom promot ar also favorit tool of the franchis scammer comput
technolog is a popular front sinc thousand of peopl realli ar set up busi from
their home a few earli dividend check per the ponzi playbook ar often enough to
overcom a client hesit and provok a more sizeabl invest then the promot
can fold up and move to anoth state or anoth coast
bigmonei specul often base their highflown claim in the ground beneath our feet
land and the miner drawn from it like gold coal and oil ha ancient been regard as
the ultim commod the ground is the fundament of everi human endeavor so perhap
the land swindl is also the fundament of fraud someon somewher it seem ha alwai
been sell flood lot to homestead salt gold mine with chunk of pyrit or
assur a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acr of desert he
just bought for a song
obvious a commerci environ that thrive on specul is ripe for ponzi fraud
rememb the ponzi element in a ponzi scheme is onli a techniqu give back a few
dollar to sweeten the pot anyth that can coax peopl to part with their monei from
consum fraud financi transact
11748 2011 fraud examin manual
emu farm to underwat land develop can be run as a ponzi all the name ponzi
realli mean is that a few mark get paid thi lend a competit element to an otherwis
runofthemil fraud instead of everyon lose some lucki player do make monei
specul fraud dont alwai start out as con but when their rollercoast dip mani
specul find it too tempt to hang on and ride thei figur thei can phoni their wai
through the crisi and pick up again later again it math that usual doom these player
thei simpli cant make monei fast enough to feed the deficit thei need a payoff so big
noth short of a miracl or more fraud will suffic
specul can quickli get caught in a chain reaction where each fraud demand more
fraud by the time these organ ar shut down theyr spend half of their resourc
or more just cover up their crimin act
