2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Franchise Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Franchise Fraud   
Franchising is part of the American Dream. A gateway to business ownership for millions of 
Americans, franchising is estimated to account for more than 40 percent of all retail sales in 
the United States — a percentage that is expected to reach 50 percent in a few short years 
according to a report issued by the House Committee on Small Business. But the dream of 
business ownership can be easily shattered by fraud.  
  
Franchise Regulation 
In 1978, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) entered the realm of franchise regulation 
by enacting “Disclosure Requirements and Prohibitions Concerning Franchising And 
Business Opportunity Ventures”—the “FTC Rule” (16 C.F.R. Part 436). As stated by the 
FTC, “the Rule is designed to enable potential franchisees to protect themselves before 
investing by providing them with information essential to an assessment of the potential 
risks and benefits, to meaningful comparisons with other investments, and to further 
investigation of the franchise opportunity.” As this mission statement suggests, the FTC rule 
addresses the disclosures made by franchisers to potential franchisees, as opposed to ongoing 
issues in the relationship  between franchisers and franchisees and other issues that arise in the 
termination  of franchise relationships.  
 
But the 1978 enactment of the FTC rule did not lead to the eradication of fraud claims in 
franchising relationships—among the rule’s deficiencies, it does not create a private civil 
action. Many state legislatures have enacted laws that supplement the FTC Rule. Illinois is a 
good example of a progressive state in franchisee law. The rule, however, preempts any 
inconsistent state disclosure laws.  
 
The FTC Franchise Rule 
The FTC Franchise Rule prohibits fraud in the initial sale of a franchise in which the 
franchise affects interstate commerce. Under the rule, franchisors must furnish potential 
franchisees with written disclosures providing important information about the franchisor, 
the franchised business and the franchise relationship, and give them at least 10 business 
days to review it before investing. 
 
                                                          
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1751 
Franchisors may make the required disclosures by following either the Rule’s disclosure 
format or the Uniform Franchise Offering Circular (UFOC) Guidelines prepared by state 
franchise law officials. 
 
The Rule imposes six different requirements in connection with the “advertising, offering, 
licensing, contracting, sale, or other promotion” of a franchise in or affecting commerce:  
• The Rule requires franchisors to give potential investors a basic disclosure document at 
the earlier of the first face-to-face meeting or 10 business days before any money is paid 
or an agreement is signed in connection with the investment. 
• If a franchisor makes earnings claims, whether historical or forecasted, they must have a 
reasonable basis, and prescribed substantiating disclosures must be given to a potential 
investor in writing at the same time as the basic disclosures.  
• The Rule affects only ads that include an earnings claim. Such ads must disclose the 
number and percentage of existing franchisees who have achieved the claimed results, 
along with cautionary language. Their use triggers required compliance with the Rule’s 
earnings claim disclosure requirements.  
• The franchisor must give investors a copy of its standard-form franchise and related 
agreements at the same time as the basic disclosures, and final copies intended to be 
executed at least five business days before signing.  
• The Rule requires franchisors to make refunds of deposits and initial payments to 
potential investors, subject to any conditions on refundability stated in the disclosure 
document.  
 
While franchisors are free to provide investors with any promotional or other materials they 
wish, no written or oral claims may contradict information provided in the required 
disclosure document.  
 
The FTC alone has jurisdiction to enforce the rule. However, any misrepresentations in a 
UFOC certainly could be used to support claims for fraud under state statutory and/or 
common law. The FTC rule preempts inconsistent state laws. As a practical matter, it creates 
a minimum disclosure standard, which many states have equaled or enhanced by statute. 
 
State Laws 
More than half of the states have enacted either general franchise disclosure laws or business 
opportunity laws, or both. Approximately 15 states have enacted franchise disclosure laws 
that create a cause of action for failure to register a franchise with the designated state 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1752                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency and/or failure to provide the appropriate disclosure to the prospective franchisee in a 
timely manner. Those states include California, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Maryland, Michigan, 
Minnesota, New York, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Virginia, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. These state laws give franchise purchasers important legal 
rights, including the right to bring private lawsuits for violations of the state disclosure 
requirements. The state statutes provide damages or rescission as the remedies available to 
the successful franchisee. 
 
About 25 states have adopted laws that regulate the offer and sale of a business opportunity 
and such legislation might be applicable franchise agreements. Those states include Alaska, 
California, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, 
Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virgina, and Washington.  
  
Other Remedies  
COMMON LAW FRAUD 
The failure of the FTC to outlaw fraud in franchising specifically beyond the disclosure 
phase does not leave a defrauded franchisee without remedies. Common law fraud is 
applicable. In general, a common law fraud action requires proof of a knowing or recklessly 
false representation or omission of material fact, reliance, and injury.  
 
Additionally, a contract may be voidable for fraud in the inducement, which occurs when one 
party enters into a contract based on the other party’s fraud. For example, if one party 
deliberately misrepresented material facts to the other, the contract will be unenforceable at 
the option of the aggrieved party. But claims of fraud in the inducement (disclosure fraud) 
are often defeated by carefully drafted language in the franchise agreement.  
 
RICO 
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), 18, U.S.C., § 1961 et seq., 
is the most powerful anti-fraud statute available to civil litigants because it provides for 
automatic trebling (tripling) of damages plus attorneys’ fees and costs—and RICO is highly 
relevant to franchising. There have been several cases where class action plaintiffs have 
established RICO claims based on the ongoing, system-wide fraud that had occurred 
concerning the advertising funds. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1753 
Overview of Franchising   
Under the FTC rule, as well as the statutory and/or common law of all or almost all of the 
states, there are three prerequisites to apply the rule to a business format or product 
franchise: trademark, significant control or assistance, and required payment.  
 
Trademark
The franchiser offers the right to distribute goods or services that bear the franchiser’s 
trademark, service mark, trade name, advertising, or other commercial symbol. 
 
Significant Control or Assistance 
The franchiser exercises significant control over, and/or offers substantial assistance to the 
franchisee in the operation of the franchised business. 
 
Required Payment 
The franchisee is required to pay the franchiser. These payments usually include initial 
franchise fees and ongoing royalties that are calculated as a percentage of sales, net of sales 
tax. Another typical fee is a transfer fee that is applicable on the sale of a franchise. 
 
Fraud in franchising may occur at each stage of the franchise relationship, creating 
disclosure, relationship, and termination issues. 
 
Disclosure Issues 
“Disclosure issues” arise when the franchiser fails to communicate material information or 
discloses false information to induce the franchisee to purchase a franchise that he would 
not have otherwise purchased. Two prime examples of potentially misleading information 
are earnings claims and success rates. 
 
Earnings Claims 
Assume that a prospective franchisee relies upon earnings claims published by the franchiser as 
a key factor in his decision to buy the franchise, but those earnings claims are materially 
misleading, or even blatantly false. This is a prime example of disclosure fraud in connection 
with the franchiser’s inducement of potential franchisees to buy the franchise.  
 
Disclosure fraud historically has been the primary target of franchiser regulations. The FTC 
reported that from 1989 to 1992, 100 percent of its franchise enforcement cases were based 
on allegations that the franchiser had provided fraudulent or misleading earnings claims. But 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1754                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
surprisingly, the FTC does not require franchisers to disclose earnings. The FTC rule 
provides for the disclosure of earnings claims regarding actual or potential sales. Income, 
costs, or profits of either existing or prospective franchisees is optional. But if a franchiser 
elects to make earnings claims, it must have a “reasonable” basis for those claims. 
 
Absent published earnings claims, the prospective franchisee is vulnerable to non-written, 
boastful earnings claims made by franchise salespeople who make their living selling 
franchises instead of selling the underlying goods or services. Those non-written claims may 
turn out to be false but the franchiser may try to protect itself by including in the written 
franchise agreement a “no reliance” or “integration” clause that states in effect: 
 
Franchisee acknowledges that this Agreement is the entire agreement of the parties, and 
that in entering into this Agreement, he or she is not relying upon any statements or 
representations that may have been made on or before the date of this Agreement, which are 
not expressly made a part of this Agreement.  
 
Clauses similar to this one often have been used to defeat claims of fraud submitted by 
franchisees who were induced to sign a contract based upon the franchiser’s verbal 
representations. 
 
Success Rates 
Another important disclosure issue is a franchiser’s claim that “X” percent (usually a high 
percentage) of its stores have been successful; in other words, they have remained in 
continuous operation from opening day to the present. But the franchise salesperson may 
not have told the franchisee that a number of stores were sold many times and in each sale 
the old franchisee sold the store back to the franchiser who re-sold it to a new franchisee. 
Would that additional information be material to the prospective franchisee? Would failure 
to disclose that information amount to fraud?  
 
The FTC rule does not require franchisers to disclose re-sales or turnovers from one 
franchisee to the next.  
 
Relationship Issues 
Fraud in franchising is not limited to disclosure fraud. Once the franchising relationship is 
established, the franchiser and franchisee stand in a business relationship that typically 
involves the transaction of funds at several levels under a series of contracts:  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1755 
• The payment of royalties under the franchise or license agreement for the right to use 
the franchiser’s trademark, trade name, and business system. 
• The payment of rent under a lease or sub-lease of real property and/or equipment. 
• Contributions to an advertising fund. 
 
All of these financial transactions may be subject to claims for breach of contract, fraud, or 
breach of a fiduciary duty. Of course, to determine the exact claims, you must consult the 
exact language in the franchise agreement.  
Numerous issues also may arise in the course of the franchise relationship, each of which 
reflects an inherent tension between the interests of franchiser and franchisee: 
• Training and support.  Has the franchiser provided the level of training and technical 
support that was promised? 
• Control. What degree of control is the franchiser en titled to exercise over the franchisee’s 
products, suppliers, and pricing? To what extent may the franchiser derive profit from 
the franchisee’s supplier relationships? 
• New products.  To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to introduce new products 
to keep ahead of the competition? Once the decision to introduce new products is made, 
is the franchiser held to any “standard of care” to ensure that the product is successful? 
• Expansion or contraction of the system.  Does the franchiser’s natural desire to expand the 
franchise system conflict with a franchisee’s de sire to maximize profits at his location? 
Conversely, what duties, if any, does a franchiser owe to franchisees in a particular 
market if the franchiser plans to withdraw from that market? 
• Encroachment. To what extent does the franchiser have a duty to refrain from opening 
new outlets “too close” to existing units? How close is “too close” if the license 
agreement is silent?  
• Expansion by the franchisee. To what extent is an individual franchisee’s desire to expand in 
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole?  
• Reinvestment. May a franchiser require a franchisee to reinvest a portion of his revenue 
back into the business? Does it depend on whether the franchisee owns or leases the  
real estate? 
 
Termination Issues 
The end of a franchise relationship also may provide grounds for litigation: 
• Renewal.  Does a franchiser have a duty to renew a franchisee beyond the initial term of 
his license agreement? 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1756                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Early termination. Under what circumstances may a franchiser terminate a franchise before 
the expiration of his contractual term? 
• Sale of a franchise. Under what circumstances may a franchiser veto a franchisee’s 
proposed sale of his franchise to a third-party? 
• Post-termination restrictions on competition.  To what extent may the franchiser restrict the 
franchisee’s right to compete after termination? Even if a franchisee is allowed to 
compete after the franchise relationship is ended, the franchiser may sometimes validly 
demand that the franchisee leave his business telephone number to the franchiser as it 
departs the system. 
 
 



:


franchis fraud
franchis is part of the american dream a gatewai to busi ownership for million of
american franchis is estim to account for more than 40 percent of all retail sale in
the unit state a percentag that is expect to reach 50 percent in a few short year
accord to a report issu by the hous committe on small busi but the dream of
busi ownership can be easili shatter by fraud
franchis regul
in 1978 the us feder trade commiss ftc enter the realm of franchis regul
by enact disclosur requir and prohibit concern franchis and
busi opportun venturesth ftc rule 16 cfr part 436 as state by the
ftc the rule is design to enabl potenti franchise to protect themselv befor
invest by provid them with inform essenti to an assess of the potenti
risk and benefit to meaning comparison with other invest and to further
investig of the franchis opportun as thi mission statement suggest the ftc rule
address the disclosur made by franchis to potenti franchise as oppos to ongo
issu in the relationship between franchis and franchise and other issu that aris in the
termin of franchis relationship
but the 1978 enact of the ftc rule did not lead to the erad of fraud claim in
franchis relationshipsamong the rule defici it doe not creat a privat civil
action mani state legislatur have enact law that supplement the ftc rule illinoi is a
good exampl of a progress state in franchise law the rule howev preempt ani
inconsist state disclosur law
the ftc franchis rule
the ftc franchis rule prohibit fraud in the initi sale of a franchis in which the
franchis affect interst commerc under the rule franchisor must furnish potenti
franchise with written disclosur provid import inform about the franchisor
the franchis busi and the franchis relationship and give them at least 10 busi
dai to review it befor invest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11751
franchisor mai make the requir disclosur by follow either the rule disclosur
format or the uniform franchis offer circular ufoc guidelin prepar by state
franchis law offici
the rule impos six differ requir in connect with the advertis offer
licens contract sale or other promot of a franchis in or affect commerc
the rule requir franchisor to give potenti investor a basic disclosur document at
the earlier of the first facetofac meet or 10 busi dai befor ani monei is paid
or an agreement is sign in connect with the invest
if a franchisor make earn claim whether histor or forecast thei must have a
reason basi and prescrib substanti disclosur must be given to a potenti
investor in write at the same time as the basic disclosur
the rule affect onli ad that includ an earn claim such ad must disclos the
number and percentag of exist franchise who have achiev the claim result
along with cautionari languag their us trigger requir complianc with the rule
earn claim disclosur requir
the franchisor must give investor a copi of it standardform franchis and relat
agreement at the same time as the basic disclosur and final copi intend to be
execut at least five busi dai befor sign
the rule requir franchisor to make refund of deposit and initi payment to
potenti investor subject to ani condit on refund state in the disclosur
document
while franchisor ar free to provid investor with ani promot or other materi thei
wish no written or oral claim mai contradict inform provid in the requir
disclosur document
the ftc alon ha jurisdict to enforc the rule howev ani misrepresent in a
ufoc certainli could be us to support claim for fraud under state statutori andor
common law the ftc rule preempt inconsist state law as a practic matter it creat
a minimum disclosur standard which mani state have equal or enhanc by statut
state law
more than half of the state have enact either gener franchis disclosur law or busi
opportun law or both approxim 15 state have enact franchis disclosur law
that creat a caus of action for failur to regist a franchis with the design state
consum fraud financi transact
11752 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc andor failur to provid the appropri disclosur to the prospect franchise in a
time manner those state includ california hawaii illinoi indiana maryland michigan
minnesota new york north dakota oregon rhode island south dakota virginia
washington and wisconsin these state law give franchis purchas import legal
right includ the right to bring privat lawsuit for violat of the state disclosur
requir the state statut provid damag or resciss as the remedi avail to
the success franchise
about 25 state have adopt law that regul the offer and sale of a busi opportun
and such legisl might be applic franchis agreement those state includ alaska
california connecticut florida georgia illinoi indiana iowa kentucki louisiana
main maryland michigan minnesota nebraska new hampshir north carolina ohio
oklahoma south carolina south dakota texa utah virgina and washington
other remedi
common law fraud
the failur of the ftc to outlaw fraud in franchis specif beyond the disclosur
phase doe not leav a defraud franchise without remedi common law fraud is
applic in gener a common law fraud action requir proof of a know or recklessli
fals represent or omiss of materi fact relianc and injuri
addition a contract mai be voidabl for fraud in the induc which occur when on
parti enter into a contract base on the other parti fraud for exampl if on parti
deliber misrepres materi fact to the other the contract will be unenforc at
the option of the aggriev parti but claim of fraud in the induc disclosur fraud
ar often defeat by carefulli draft languag in the franchis agreement
rico
the racket influenc and corrupt organ act rico 18 usc 1961 et seq
is the most power antifraud statut avail to civil litig becaus it provid for
automat trebl tripl of damag plu attornei fee and costsand rico is highli
relev to franchis there have been sever case where class action plaintiff have
establish rico claim base on the ongo systemwid fraud that had occur
concern the advertis fund
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11753
overview of franchis
under the ftc rule as well as the statutori andor common law of all or almost all of the
state there ar three prerequisit to appli the rule to a busi format or product
franchis trademark signific control or assist and requir payment
trademark
the franchis offer the right to distribut good or servic that bear the franchis
trademark servic mark trade name advertis or other commerci symbol
signific control or assist
the franchis exercis signific control over andor offer substanti assist to the
franchise in the oper of the franchis busi
requir payment
the franchise is requir to pai the franchis these payment usual includ initi
franchis fee and ongo royalti that ar calcul as a percentag of sale net of sale
tax anoth typic fee is a transfer fee that is applic on the sale of a franchis
fraud in franchis mai occur at each stage of the franchis relationship creat
disclosur relationship and termin issu
disclosur issu
disclosur issu aris when the franchis fail to commun materi inform or
disclos fals inform to induc the franchise to purchas a franchis that he would
not have otherwis purchas two prime exampl of potenti mislead inform
ar earn claim and success rate
earn claim
assum that a prospect franchise reli upon earn claim publish by the franchis as
a kei factor in hi decis to bui the franchis but those earn claim ar materi
mislead or even blatantli fals thi is a prime exampl of disclosur fraud in connect
with the franchis induc of potenti franchise to bui the franchis
disclosur fraud histor ha been the primari target of franchis regul the ftc
report that from 1989 to 1992 100 percent of it franchis enforc case were base
on alleg that the franchis had provid fraudul or mislead earn claim but
consum fraud financi transact
11754 2011 fraud examin manual
surprisingli the ftc doe not requir franchis to disclos earn the ftc rule
provid for the disclosur of earn claim regard actual or potenti sale incom
cost or profit of either exist or prospect franchise is option but if a franchis
elect to make earn claim it must have a reason basi for those claim
absent publish earn claim the prospect franchise is vulner to nonwritten
boast earn claim made by franchis salespeopl who make their live sell
franchis instead of sell the underli good or servic those nonwritten claim mai
turn out to be fals but the franchis mai try to protect itself by includ in the written
franchis agreement a no relianc or integr claus that state in effect
franchise acknowledg that thi agreement is the entir agreement of the parti and
that in enter into thi agreement he or she is not reli upon ani statement or
represent that mai have been made on or befor the date of thi agreement which ar
not expressli made a part of thi agreement
claus similar to thi on often have been us to defeat claim of fraud submit by
franchise who were induc to sign a contract base upon the franchis verbal
represent
success rate
anoth import disclosur issu is a franchis claim that x percent usual a high
percentag of it store have been success in other word thei have remain in
continu oper from open dai to the present but the franchis salesperson mai
not have told the franchise that a number of store were sold mani time and in each sale
the old franchise sold the store back to the franchis who resold it to a new franchise
would that addit inform be materi to the prospect franchise would failur
to disclos that inform amount to fraud
the ftc rule doe not requir franchis to disclos resal or turnov from on
franchise to the next
relationship issu
fraud in franchis is not limit to disclosur fraud onc the franchis relationship is
establish the franchis and franchise stand in a busi relationship that typic
involv the transact of fund at sever level under a seri of contract
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11755
the payment of royalti under the franchis or licens agreement for the right to us
the franchis trademark trade name and busi system
the payment of rent under a leas or subleas of real properti andor equip
contribut to an advertis fund
all of these financi transact mai be subject to claim for breach of contract fraud or
breach of a fiduciari duti of cours to determin the exact claim you must consult the
exact languag in the franchis agreement
numer issu also mai aris in the cours of the franchis relationship each of which
reflect an inher tension between the interest of franchis and franchise
train and support ha the franchis provid the level of train and technic
support that wa promis
control what degre of control is the franchis en titl to exercis over the franchise
product supplier and price to what extent mai the franchis deriv profit from
the franchise supplier relationship
new product to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to introduc new product
to keep ahead of the competit onc the decis to introduc new product is made
is the franchis held to ani standard of care to ensur that the product is success
expans or contract of the system doe the franchis natur desir to expand the
franchis system conflict with a franchise de sire to maxim profit at hi locat
convers what duti if ani doe a franchis ow to franchise in a particular
market if the franchis plan to withdraw from that market
encroach to what extent doe the franchis have a duti to refrain from open
new outlet too close to exist unit how close is too close if the licens
agreement is silent
expans by the franchise to what extent is an individu franchise desir to expand in
conflict with what is best for the system as a whole
reinvest mai a franchis requir a franchise to reinvest a portion of hi revenu
back into the busi doe it depend on whether the franchise own or leas the
real estat
termin issu
the end of a franchis relationship also mai provid ground for litig
renew doe a franchis have a duti to renew a franchise beyond the initi term of
hi licens agreement
consum fraud financi transact
11756 2011 fraud examin manual
earli termin under what circumst mai a franchis termin a franchis befor
the expir of hi contractu term
sale of a franchis under what circumst mai a franchis veto a franchise
propos sale of hi franchis to a thirdparti
posttermin restrict on competit to what extent mai the franchis restrict the
franchise right to compet after termin even if a franchise is allow to
compet after the franchis relationship is end the franchis mai sometim validli
demand that the franchise leav hi busi telephon number to the franchis as it
depart the system
