2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Identity Theft


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Identity Theft 
Identity theft is an increasingly frequent type of fraud that is non-discriminatory in nature. 
Anyone can be targeted; the victim might be a college student, a retiree, a schoolteacher, or a 
successful attorney. Even corporations are susceptible to identity theft.  
 
2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report 
According to the 2010 Identity Fraud Survey Report conducted by Javelin Strategy & Research, 
the number of identity fraud victims in the U.S. has increased to 11 million from 10 million 
reported in the 2009 report. Although the total annual fraud amount increased by 12.5 
percent over the previous year to $54 billion, the report found that detection and resolution 
efforts are working well.  
 
Some of the key findings of the survey were: 
• The mean consumer cost of identity fraud decreased 25 percent, from $496 per incident 
in 2008 to $373 per incident in 2009, as a result of faster detection, lower fraud amounts, 
and quicker resolution times.  
• Social networking fraud and potential threats will likely escalate in the upcoming years.  
One of the dangers of social networking sites is the public display of personal 
information. Personal pages and account profiles can expose sensitive, personally 
identifiable information, and hints on how to easily find it. Criminals can harvest this 
information to take over accounts or open fraudulent accounts. 
• Contrary to prior years’ data, online identity theft methods constituted 42 percent of 
fraud cases in 2009. The other significant group of known cases occur through 
traditional methods when a criminal can make direct contact with the consumer’s 
personal information. The common methods of access included: 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1757 
- Obtained from a lost or stolen wallet, checkbook, credit card, or other physical 
document 
- Accessed while conducting a purchase or transactionAccessed by friends, 
acquaintances, relatives, or in-home employees 
- Stolen from a company that handles your financial data 
- Stolen paper mail 
 
Although there is no universal definition of identity theft, the Department of Justice offers 
the following definition: 
 
Identity theft and fraud are crimes in which someone wrongfully obtains and uses another 
person’s personal data in some way that involves fraud or deception, typically for economic 
gain.  
 
Personal identification data includes name, address, Social Security number, date of birth, 
mother’s maiden name, or other identifying information. The perpetrator exploits this 
information by opening bank or credit card accounts, taking over existing accounts, 
obtaining loans, leasing cars or apartments, or applying for wireless telephone and utilities 
services in the victim’s name without his knowledge.  
 
Technological advancements that facilitate the electronic transfer of personal information 
and the transmission of financial transactions have greatly contributed to the recent increase 
in occurrences of identity theft. As such technologies continue to develop, this type of fraud 
will likely remain a serious problem that affects many people. 
 
The Profile 
Unlike some fraudsters who steal as the result of a perceived need, most identity thieves 
make a living stealing identities for profit or at the very least, to supplement their incomes 
generously. Although it can be an employee, friend, or relative, generally the fraudster usually 
falls into one or more profiles: 
• Been convicted, served time in prison, wishes to conceal his identity  
• Been convicted, served time in prison and looking for a “safer” way to commit a crime 
and stay out of prison 
• College student looking for an “easy” way to work his way through school 
• Landlord 
• Rental car agents 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1758                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Illegal aliens needing an identity 
• Illegal telemarketers 
 
Common Ways of Obtaining Information 
While you might think that you are careful with your personal information, in reality, a lot of 
information can be easily found and acquired by identity thieves without you even realizing 
it. An innocent inquiry for the most basic of information, such as verifying an address or 
mother’s maiden name for a banker’s files, can be the start of a financial nightmare. The 
most common ways information is obtained are: 
• Sorting through discarded trash 
• Shoulder surfing 
• Rifling through coworker’s desk drawers 
• Theft of mail — incoming or outgoing 
• Using an accomplice within the organization  
• Soliciting identifiers through false job application schemes 
• Telephone companies, health clubs, and schools 
• Certifications and licenses placed on workplace walls  
• Using pretext, ruse, or gag calls  
• Rental and loan applications  
• Public records  
• The Internet 
 
Sorting Through Discarded Trash 
Most people do not destroy their personal financial data; they simply throw it away with the 
rest of their trash for pick-up by the garbage collectors on their regularly scheduled day. 
Solicitations for pre-approved credit cards are some of the most valuable pieces of trash that 
an identity thief can steal. Additionally, “dumpster diving” as it is more popularly known as, 
can yield checks, credit card and bank statements, or other records that bear your name, 
address, and telephone number. In addition to targeting an individual’s trash, dumpster 
divers target the trash at banks, insurance companies, hospitals, and other businesses—
 locations that an individual has no control over. 
 
Shoulder Surfing 
Shoulder surfing is another popular way that the identity thief obtains information. The 
person watches from a nearby location and listens to someone’s telephone conversation or 
watches the numbers being punched for a calling card or credit card, thus obtaining enough 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1759 
information to use or procure a credit card. Identity thieves also watch potential victims as 
they fill out bank deposit slips thus getting account information. 
 
Rifling Through Coworker’s Desk Drawers 
When people leave for break, go to lunch, or take vacation or sick leave, many if not most, 
do not lock up their desks or offices. Many people also leave personal items in their desk 
drawers, such as bank statements, monthly credit card statements, or mortgage coupon 
books — all of which have useful information for an identity thief. 
 
Theft of Mail — Incoming or Outgoing 
Theft of mail in either direction provides useful information to the fraudster. Outgoing 
checks left for the mail carrier to pick up provide bank account numbers and other 
information that can be used for illegal purposes. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Using just a driver’s license number and bank account number, a thief was able to 
withdraw more than $30,000 from a security guard’s checking account. In this case, the 
thief used the drive-through at the security guard’s bank to deposit a series of stolen money 
orders and simultaneously make large withdrawals.  
 
Using an Accomplice Within the Organization  
Sometimes the identity thief is able to compromise someone within an organization and 
obtain enough information where credit can be obtained. It may be a bank employee who 
has access to Social Security numbers and bank balances or an insurance clerk who has 
access to personal information such as name, address, Social Security numbers, and medical 
information — all useful when assuming someone’s identity. 
 
Soliciting Identifiers Through False Job Application Schemes 
Filling out a job application might also be the source of information to identity thieves. 
People believe that they are filling out a job application, when in reality they are only 
supplying personal information to a thief. 
 
Utility Companies, Health Clubs, and Schools 
Utility companies, health clubs, and schools all carry identifiers that a fraudster can make use 
of. Once again, the Social Security number is used on many applications and is a key to 
obtaining other information. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1760                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A California woman used a stolen Social Security number to obtain thousands of dollars 
in credit and then filed for bankruptcy in the name of her victim. She was sentenced to 16 
months in federal prison. In addition to the prison term, she was ordered to pay restitution 
in the amount of $13,928 and pay a $5,000 criminal fine.  
 
She admitted that she assumed the identity of another woman with a similar name in order 
to obtain loans that she was not qualified to receive. The FBI began investigating the case 
after it was contacted by the victim, an English professor at a university in Georgia. The 
professor had graduated from a college in Arizona that the defendant also briefly attended, 
and both women had received student loans that were administered through the same 
company.  
 
Due to a computer mix-up, documents belonging to the professor — which included her 
Social Security number — were sent to the defendant. Shortly thereafter, the professor began 
receiving telephone calls from companies that she had never heard of claiming she owed them 
large sums of money. 
 
Certifications, Diplomas, Licenses Placed On Workplace Walls 
Something as innocent as a diploma, professional certification, or license can be the 
identifying information that a fraudster uses to obtain a false identity. In the case of a 
professional license, some states require that it be displayed in a prominent place. 
Consequently, information such as the name, address, and license number is readily available 
to the thief. 
 
Using Pretext, Ruse, or Gag Calls  
Using pretext, ruse, or gag calls claiming to be a person to whom personal information 
would normally be released is common in an identity theft. Since there is no way to verify 
the person on the end of a phone line with photo identification, having only a small amount 
of information can yield the additional data the fraudster seeks. 
 
For example, a number of individuals have reported being called by people claiming to be 
court personnel. The caller states that there is an outstanding warrant for the individual due 
to unpaid tickets or failure to appear for jury duty. When the individual protests his 
innocence, the caller says that it must be a mistake, and asks the individual to provide his 
driver’s license number, Social Security number, and birth date so that the caller can confirm 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1761 
that a mistake has been made. The caller now has all the information needed to steal the 
individual’s identity. 
 
Rental and Loan Applications 
Almost without exception, rental and loan applications yield enough information that can be 
used to establish a false identity. An applicant’s name, Social Security number, previous 
address(es), employment history, telephone numbers, and credit history are required to 
complete the application. Once the thief gets a hold of that information, it is usually quite 
easy to establish an identity. 
 
Public Records  
Public records yield a wealth of personal data for the identity thief. Real estate records, tax 
liens, licenses, litigation records, and, in some states, drivers license numbers, all reveal 
enough information that can be used to steal a person’s identity or least provide a start for 
the fraudster. 
 
The Internet 
The Internet offers many opportunities to the identity thief. It has made much information 
available to more people at a small cost. It has also been an attractive place for identity 
thieves to find their victim. Once you have logged on, information you thought was private 
might now be traced by anyone who is interested in finding personal information about you. 
Identifying information such as passwords, credit card numbers, and in some cases, banking 
information has been made available via the Internet. Spam, or unsolicited e-mail, is 
frequently responded to by many people who are unaware that the sole purpose of the e-
 mail is to obtain personal information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A Midwestern woman was accused of trying to get a $25,000 loan through an Illinois 
bank using personal information she found on the Internet. The victim, a college professor, 
called police when the bank sent the completed application to her home rather than to the 
home of the accused. The same woman reportedly obtained a MasterCard under another 
professor’s name and ran up almost $3,000 in charges.  
 
In addition, some database companies sell information — your personal information — online 
to persons or organizations that you might not want to have that information, thus 
increasing the chance for fraud and abuse. For example, information you provide by 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1762                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
responding to a questionnaire online might be collected and sold to insurance and drug 
companies without your knowledge. The same can be true when applying for a low-interest 
credit card or consumer loans. Do you know who is actually receiving the information that 
you provide online? There is no physical address to check out in most cases. 
 
The Internet also is a source for “information brokering.” For a fee, information brokers will 
reveal the most personal aspects of your life — from financial information to medical 
information. For fees as low as $40 per search, they will disclose everything from non-published 
telephone numbers to the location of your safety deposit box. Some of it is legal 
and can be found in public records, but some of it is illegal.  
 
Tracking Down the Thief 
There are many ways that the fraud examiner can track down an identity thief. Some require 
the assistance of law enforcement, while others do not. Examples of techniques that have 
been successfully used to catch an identity thief are: 
• Establish surveillance of the address in question. 
• Have overnight delivery services “flag” the address in question. 
• Subpoena telephone records for the telephone(s) being used by the perpetrator. 
• Contact credit bureaus and have them “fl ag” the true account holder’s file. 
• Contact the Social Security Administration to determine if the number is listed twice in 
the system. 
• Obtain videos from retailers showing the perpetrator making purchases using the 
victim’s identity. 
• Obtain a copy of the perpetrator’s picture on the fictitious driver’s license. 
• Track down addresses and telephone numbers that do not belong to the victim but show 
up in their file. 
• Have the victim notify the fraud examiner when further breaches occur. 
• Report the fraud to law enforcement. 
 
Confronting the Fraudster 
If the fraudster has been identified and is to be confronted, the fraud examiner should keep 
the following in mind: 
• On initial contact, call the fraudster by the wrong name; generally he will then produce 
identification in the name of the victim. 
• Try to establish the fraudster’s true identity. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1763 
• For safety reasons, use caution when confronting the thief; never forget that the 
fraudster could be a convicted felon who does not want to go back to prison. 
 
Federal Identity Theft Statutes 
There are two primary federal laws that address identity theft: the Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act and the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act. 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
In October 1998, Congress passed the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act 
(Identity Theft Act) to address the problem of identity theft. Specifically, the Act outlaws the 
intentional and unauthorized use of another individual’s identification, with the intent to 
commit a crime.  
 
It carries a maximum term of 15 years’ imprisonment, a fine, and criminal forfeiture of any 
personal property used or intended to be used to commit the offense. (The penalty is 
increased to a maximum of 30 years imprisonment if the offense is committed to facilitate 
an act of terrorism.) Identity theft schemes may also involve other violations such as mail 
fraud, wire fraud, credit card fraud, or financial institution fraud. 
 
Violations of the Act are investigated by federal investigative agencies such as the U.S. Secret 
Service, the FBI, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service and are prosecuted by the 
Department of Justice. 
 
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act 
In August 2004, Congress passed the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act (18, U.S.C., § 
1028A). This Act strengthens federal law on identity theft by creating a crime of “aggravated 
identity theft.” Aggravated identity theft occurs when an individual uses a stolen identity to 
commit other crimes. Specifically, this law provides that where one “knowingly transfers, 
possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of another” during and 
in relation to any felony violation of/or relating to fraud, embezzlement, false statements, 
and the like, an additional term of imprisonment of two years will be imposed on the 
individual. In April 2005, the United States Sentencing Commission went an extra step to 
impose consecutive mandatory minimum sentences of two and five years depending on the 
underlying offense of misusing a stolen identification. The guideline became effective 
November 1, 2005. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1764                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
See the chapter on “The Law Related to Fraud” in the Legal Section for more information 
about this Act. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Wisconsin man was sentenced to 21 months imprisonment and three years supervised 
release after pleading guilty to identity theft. The defendant was also ordered to pay 
restitution totaling $62,850. 
 
The perpetrator pled guilty to using another man’s identity to obtain employment with a 
cleaning company, then using that employment to commit a burglary. 
  
Through his job at the cleaning company, the fraudster gained access to the offices of the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court where he took six computer monitors owned by the State of 
Wisconsin. The monitors were recovered almost immediately following the burglary after the 
thief abandoned the vehicle that he was driving.  
 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which protects customers’ financial information held by 
banks working in personal finance, creates privacy obligations for financial institutions. 
Specifically, financial institutions have privacy obligations under the Act’s Financial Privacy 
Rule and Safeguards Rule. The Financial Privacy Rule requires financial institutions to 
provide their customers with privacy notices explaining the institution’s policies for 
collecting and sharing personal financial information. Conversely, the Safeguards Rule 
requires all financial institutions to design, implement, and maintain safeguards to protect the 
confidentiality and integrity of customers’ personal information. 
 
Additionally, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act includes a provision that prohibits “pretexting.” 
This statute makes it illegal for anyone to obtain customer information from financial 
institutions by impersonating someone else or making false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statements. It also prohibits soliciting someone else to engage in pretexting. Violations of 
this provision can result in a fine, imprisonment of up to 5 years, or both.  
 
More information about other provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act can be found in 
the “Sources of Information” chapter in the Investigation Section of the Fraud Examiners  
Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1765 
Red Flag Rules 
On January 1, 2008, the Identity Theft Red Flag regulations (Red Flag Rules), which update 
sections of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003, became effective. Issued 
by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and five Federal bank regulatory agencies, the Red 
Flag Rules require financial institutions and creditors (i.e., banking institutions, retailers, 
utilities, car dealers, etc.) to develop and implement a written identity theft prevention 
program to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity theft for both new and existing 
accounts in numerous industries, including financial services, utilities, health care, and 
telecommunications.  
 
The agencies also issued guidelines to assist financial institutions and creditors in developing 
and implementing a program, including a supplement that provides 26 examples of identity 
theft red flags. 
 
More information about the Red Flag Rules can be found in the “Financial Institution 
Fraud” chapter above. 
 
State Laws 
States have also passed laws related to identity theft. Below is a list of U.S. states and 
territories that have passed such laws. Other states may be considering legislation in their 
next legislative session. In addition, where specific laws on identity theft have not been 
passed, there may be remedies under other state laws.  
 
Alabama Alabama Code § 13A-8-192 
Alaska Alaska Stat § 11.46.565, 570 
Arizona Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-2008 
Arkansas Ark. Code Ann. § 5-37-227 
California Cal. Penal Code § 530.5-8 
Colorado Colo. Rev. Stat. § 18-5-902 
Connecticut Conn. Stat. § 53a-129 (criminal) 
Conn. Stat. § 52-571h (civil) 
Delaware Del. Code Ann., tit. 5 § 854 
District of Columbia D.C. Official Code § 22-3227.02-04 
Florida Fla. Stat. Ann. § 817.568 
Georgia Ga. Code Ann. § 16-9-120 through 128 
Guam 9 Guam Code Ann. § 46.80 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1766                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hawaii HI Rev. Stat. § 708-839.6-8 
Idaho Idaho Code § 18-3126 (criminal) 
Illinois 720 Ill. Comp. Stat. 5/16G-13 
Indiana Ind. Code § 35-43-5-3.5 
Iowa Iowa Code § 715A.8 (criminal)  
Kansas Kan. Stat. Ann. § 21-4018 
Kentucky Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann. §  514.160 
Louisiana La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 14:67.16 
Maine ME Rev. Stat. Ann. tit. 17-A §905-A 
Maryland Md. Code Ann. art. 27 § 231 
Massachusetts Mass. Gen. Laws § 397-37E 
Michigan Mich. Comp. Laws § 445.65 
Minnesota Minn. Stat. Ann. §  609.527 
Mississippi  Miss. Code Ann. § 97-19-85 
Missouri Mo. Rev. Stat. § 570.223 
Montana Mon. Code Ann § 45-6-332 
Nebraska NE Rev. Stat. § 28-608, 620 
Nevada Nev. Rev. State. § 205.463-465 
New Hampshire  N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 638:26 
New Jersey  N.J. Stat. Ann. § 2C:21-17 
New Mexico N.M. Stat. Ann. § 30-16-24.1 
New York N.Y. CLS Penal § 190.77-190.84 
North Carolina N.C. Gen. Stat. § 14-113.20-23 
North Dakota N.D.C.C. § 12.1-23-11 
Ohio Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 2913.49 
Oklahoma Okla. Stat. tit. 21, § 1533.1 
Oregon Or. Rev. Stat. § 165.800 
Pennsylvania 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. § 4120 
Rhode Island R.I. Gen. Laws § 11-49.1-1-4 
South Carolina S.C. Code Ann. § 16-13-510-530 
South Dakota S.D. Codified Laws § 22-30A-3.1. 
Tennessee TCA § 39-14-150 (criminal) 
TCA § 47-18-2101-2103, 2105 (civil)  
Texas  Tex. Penal Code § 32.51 
Utah Utah Code Ann. § 76-6-1101 -1104 
Vermont Vermont Code § 13.2030 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1767 
Virginia Va. Code Ann. § 18.2-186.3 
Washington Wash. Rev. Code § 9.35.020 
West Virginia W. Va. Code § 61-3-54 
Wisconsin Wis. Stat. § 943.201 
Wyoming Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 6-3-901 
U.S. Virgin Islands 14 VI Code Ann. §§ 3003  
 
Preventing False Identity Fraud 
Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel 
In September 2006, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the Better 
Business Bureau (BBB) established the Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards 
Panel (IDSP) 4 as a cross-sector initiative to catalog existing standards related to identity theft 
prevention and to identify areas where additional standards and best practices are needed to 
help businesses and other organizations further prevent identity fraud. In January 2008, the 
IDSP released a two-volume report providing a detailed inventory of standards and best 
practices that can be used to prevent identity theft and a number of recommendations for 
security enhancements around the issuance of identity credentials and the exchange and 
maintenance of identity data. The ANSI-BBB IDSP Report, available for downloading at no 
charge at www.ansi.org/idsp, is a useful tool for businesses, government agencies, and other 
organizations that wish to evaluate and augment their current identity theft prevention and 
identity management practices. 
 
Consumer Protection Measures 
How do you protect yourself and your clients from identity theft? Some of the useful 
methods are: 
• Before providing personal information, make sure the individual or business requesting 
it has a valid reason for requiring the information. 
• Never write your credit card numbers or Social Security number on checks or on the 
outside of envelopes. 
• Don’t give account numbers over the telephone or to persons/companies you are not 
familiar with. 
                                                          
4 Report Summary: Excerpts from Final Report – Volume 1: Findings and Recommendations. Published by 
the ANSI-BBB Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel, January 31, 2008. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1768                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Don’t use cordless or cellular telephones or e-mail to transmit financial or private 
personal information. 
• Keep all financial documents in a secure place. 
• If you have your driver’s license information pre-printed on your checks, shred canceled 
checks before discarding them. 
• Check your financial information regularly looking for what should and shouldn’t  
be there. 
• Obtain a copy of your credit report on a regular basis. 
• Tear up or shred pre-approved credit applications. 
• Have yourself taken off of “pre-screened lists.” 
• Mail bills from the post office or your business location 
• Consider having your name and telephone number removed from the telephone 
directory or having the address removed. 
• Don’t provide personal information over the telephone unless you initiated the call and 
know who you are speaking with. 
• If telemarketing companies call, tell them: “Under the federal Telephone Consumer 
Protection Act, I want to be on your ‘do not call’ list.” 
• Keep your birth certificate in a safe place. 
• Choose passwords that will be difficult to crack and use different passwords for  
all accounts. 
• Change passwords and PIN codes often. 
• Don’t put your Social Security number on any document that you aren’t legally  
required to. 
• Shred any papers with financial information and identifiers rather than simply throwing 
them in the trash. 
 
In addition, insurance companies are now offering insurance for identity theft. For an annual 
fee, the policy covers the cost of clearing the policyholder’s name and correcting their 
financial records including legal expenses, loan re-application fees, telephone and certified 
mailing charges, notary expenses, and lost wages for the time it takes to deal with the fraud. 
 
What to Do If Your Identity Is Stolen 
• Start keeping detailed records. 
• File a police report with your local law enforcement agency and keep a copy of that 
report. Many banks and credit agencies require such a report before they will 
acknowledge that a theft has occurred.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1769 
• If your wallet or purse is stolen, immediately cancel your credit and debit cards and get 
replacements. Put a “stop payment” on all lost or stolen checks. 
• Report unauthorized charges and accounts to the appropriate credit issuers and credit 
bureaus immediately by phone and in writing. Change account numbers or close all 
accounts that are affected by the fraudulent activity. 
• Check for and repair further breaches of your identity. 
• Notify law enforcement agencies: 
? Federal Trade Commission (www.ftc.gov) 
? Federal Bureau of Investigation (www.fbi.gov) 
? Local and state agencies 
• Contact the three primary credit reporting bureaus to have a security alert or freeze 
placed on your report, and request a copy of your credit report and review it for 
unauthorized account activity: 
? Equifax (800) 525-6285 or (888) 766-0008 
? Experian (formerly TRW) (888) 397-3742 
? Trans Union (800) 680-7289 
 
For further information on identify theft, please visit the Federal Trade Commission’s 
information page at www.consumer.gov/idtheft/. 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1801 



:


ident theft
ident theft is an increasingli frequent type of fraud that is nondiscriminatori in natur
anyon can be target the victim might be a colleg student a retire a schoolteach or a
success attornei even corpor ar suscept to ident theft
2010 ident fraud survei report
accord to the 2010 ident fraud survei report conduct by javelin strategi research
the number of ident fraud victim in the us ha increas to 11 million from 10 million
report in the 2009 report although the total annual fraud amount increas by 125
percent over the previou year to 54 billion the report found that detect and resolut
effort ar work well
some of the kei find of the survei were
the mean consum cost of ident fraud decreas 25 percent from 496 per incid
in 2008 to 373 per incid in 2009 as a result of faster detect lower fraud amount
and quicker resolut time
social network fraud and potenti threat will like escal in the upcom year
on of the danger of social network site is the public displai of person
inform person page and account profil can expos sensit person
identifi inform and hint on how to easili find it crimin can harvest thi
inform to take over account or open fraudul account
contrari to prior year data onlin ident theft method constitut 42 percent of
fraud case in 2009 the other signific group of known case occur through
tradit method when a crimin can make direct contact with the consum
person inform the common method of access includ
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11757
obtain from a lost or stolen wallet checkbook credit card or other physic
document
access while conduct a purchas or transactionaccess by friend
acquaint rel or inhom employe
stolen from a compani that handl your financi data
stolen paper mail
although there is no univers definit of ident theft the depart of justic offer
the follow definit
ident theft and fraud ar crime in which someon wrongfulli obtain and us anoth
person person data in some wai that involv fraud or decept typic for econom
gain
person identif data includ name address social secur number date of birth
mother maiden name or other identifi inform the perpetr exploit thi
inform by open bank or credit card account take over exist account
obtain loan leas car or apart or appli for wireless telephon and util
servic in the victim name without hi knowledg
technolog advanc that facilit the electron transfer of person inform
and the transmiss of financi transact have greatli contribut to the recent increas
in occurr of ident theft as such technolog continu to develop thi type of fraud
will like remain a seriou problem that affect mani peopl
the profil
unlik some fraudster who steal as the result of a perceiv need most ident thiev
make a live steal ident for profit or at the veri least to supplement their incom
gener although it can be an employe friend or rel gener the fraudster usual
fall into on or more profil
been convict serv time in prison wish to conceal hi ident
been convict serv time in prison and look for a safer wai to commit a crime
and stai out of prison
colleg student look for an easi wai to work hi wai through school
landlord
rental car agent
consum fraud financi transact
11758 2011 fraud examin manual
illeg alien need an ident
illeg telemarket
common wai of obtain inform
while you might think that you ar care with your person inform in realiti a lot of
inform can be easili found and acquir by ident thiev without you even realiz
it an innoc inquiri for the most basic of inform such as verifi an address or
mother maiden name for a banker file can be the start of a financi nightmar the
most common wai inform is obtain ar
sort through discard trash
shoulder surf
rifl through cowork desk drawer
theft of mail incom or outgo
us an accomplic within the organ
solicit identifi through fals job applic scheme
telephon compani health club and school
certif and licens place on workplac wall
us pretext ruse or gag call
rental and loan applic
public record
the internet
sort through discard trash
most peopl do not destroi their person financi data thei simpli throw it awai with the
rest of their trash for pickup by the garbag collector on their regularli schedul dai
solicit for preapprov credit card ar some of the most valuabl piec of trash that
an ident thief can steal addition dumpster dive as it is more popularli known as
can yield check credit card and bank statement or other record that bear your name
address and telephon number in addit to target an individu trash dumpster
diver target the trash at bank insur compani hospit and other busi
locat that an individu ha no control over
shoulder surf
shoulder surf is anoth popular wai that the ident thief obtain inform the
person watch from a nearbi locat and listen to someon telephon convers or
watch the number be punch for a call card or credit card thu obtain enough
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11759
inform to us or procur a credit card ident thiev also watch potenti victim as
thei fill out bank deposit slip thu get account inform
rifl through cowork desk drawer
when peopl leav for break go to lunch or take vacat or sick leav mani if not most
do not lock up their desk or offic mani peopl also leav person item in their desk
drawer such as bank statement monthli credit card statement or mortgag coupon
book all of which have us inform for an ident thief
theft of mail incom or outgo
theft of mail in either direct provid us inform to the fraudster outgo
check left for the mail carrier to pick up provid bank account number and other
inform that can be us for illeg purpos
exampl
us just a driver licens number and bank account number a thief wa abl to
withdraw more than 30000 from a secur guard check account in thi case the
thief us the drivethrough at the secur guard bank to deposit a seri of stolen monei
order and simultan make larg withdraw
us an accomplic within the organ
sometim the ident thief is abl to compromis someon within an organ and
obtain enough inform where credit can be obtain it mai be a bank employe who
ha access to social secur number and bank balanc or an insur clerk who ha
access to person inform such as name address social secur number and medic
inform all us when assum someon ident
solicit identifi through fals job applic scheme
fill out a job applic might also be the sourc of inform to ident thiev
peopl believ that thei ar fill out a job applic when in realiti thei ar onli
suppli person inform to a thief
util compani health club and school
util compani health club and school all carri identifi that a fraudster can make us
of onc again the social secur number is us on mani applic and is a kei to
obtain other inform
consum fraud financi transact
11760 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a california woman us a stolen social secur number to obtain thousand of dollar
in credit and then file for bankruptci in the name of her victim she wa sentenc to 16
month in feder prison in addit to the prison term she wa order to pai restitut
in the amount of 13928 and pai a 5000 crimin fine
she admit that she assum the ident of anoth woman with a similar name in order
to obtain loan that she wa not qualifi to receiv the fbi began investig the case
after it wa contact by the victim an english professor at a univers in georgia the
professor had graduat from a colleg in arizona that the defend also briefli attend
and both women had receiv student loan that were administ through the same
compani
due to a comput mixup document belong to the professor which includ her
social secur number were sent to the defend shortli thereaft the professor began
receiv telephon call from compani that she had never heard of claim she ow them
larg sum of monei
certif diploma licens place on workplac wall
someth as innoc as a diploma profession certif or licens can be the
identifi inform that a fraudster us to obtain a fals ident in the case of a
profession licens some state requir that it be displai in a promin place
consequ inform such as the name address and licens number is readili avail
to the thief
us pretext ruse or gag call
us pretext ruse or gag call claim to be a person to whom person inform
would normal be releas is common in an ident theft sinc there is no wai to verifi
the person on the end of a phone line with photo identif have onli a small amount
of inform can yield the addit data the fraudster seek
for exampl a number of individu have report be call by peopl claim to be
court personnel the caller state that there is an outstand warrant for the individu due
to unpaid ticket or failur to appear for juri duti when the individu protest hi
innoc the caller sai that it must be a mistak and ask the individu to provid hi
driver licens number social secur number and birth date so that the caller can confirm
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11761
that a mistak ha been made the caller now ha all the inform need to steal the
individu ident
rental and loan applic
almost without except rental and loan applic yield enough inform that can be
us to establish a fals ident an applic name social secur number previou
address employ histori telephon number and credit histori ar requir to
complet the applic onc the thief get a hold of that inform it is usual quit
easi to establish an ident
public record
public record yield a wealth of person data for the ident thief real estat record tax
lien licens litig record and in some state driver licens number all reveal
enough inform that can be us to steal a person ident or least provid a start for
the fraudster
the internet
the internet offer mani opportun to the ident thief it ha made much inform
avail to more peopl at a small cost it ha also been an attract place for ident
thiev to find their victim onc you have log on inform you thought wa privat
might now be trace by anyon who is interest in find person inform about you
identifi inform such as password credit card number and in some case bank
inform ha been made avail via the internet spam or unsolicit email is
frequent respond to by mani peopl who ar unawar that the sole purpos of the e
mail is to obtain person inform
exampl
a midwestern woman wa accus of try to get a 25000 loan through an illinoi
bank us person inform she found on the internet the victim a colleg professor
call polic when the bank sent the complet applic to her home rather than to the
home of the accus the same woman reportedli obtain a mastercard under anoth
professor name and ran up almost 3000 in charg
in addit some databas compani sell inform your person inform onlin
to person or organ that you might not want to have that inform thu
increas the chanc for fraud and abus for exampl inform you provid by
consum fraud financi transact
11762 2011 fraud examin manual
respond to a questionnair onlin might be collect and sold to insur and drug
compani without your knowledg the same can be true when appli for a lowinterest
credit card or consum loan do you know who is actual receiv the inform that
you provid onlin there is no physic address to check out in most case
the internet also is a sourc for inform broker for a fee inform broker will
reveal the most person aspect of your life from financi inform to medic
inform for fee as low as 40 per search thei will disclos everyth from nonpublish
telephon number to the locat of your safeti deposit box some of it is legal
and can be found in public record but some of it is illeg
track down the thief
there ar mani wai that the fraud examin can track down an ident thief some requir
the assist of law enforc while other do not exampl of techniqu that have
been successfulli us to catch an ident thief ar
establish surveil of the address in question
have overnight deliveri servic flag the address in question
subpoena telephon record for the telephon be us by the perpetr
contact credit bureau and have them fl ag the true account holder file
contact the social secur administr to determin if the number is list twice in
the system
obtain video from retail show the perpetr make purchas us the
victim ident
obtain a copi of the perpetr pictur on the fictiti driver licens
track down address and telephon number that do not belong to the victim but show
up in their file
have the victim notifi the fraud examin when further breach occur
report the fraud to law enforc
confront the fraudster
if the fraudster ha been identifi and is to be confront the fraud examin should keep
the follow in mind
on initi contact call the fraudster by the wrong name gener he will then produc
identif in the name of the victim
try to establish the fraudster true ident
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11763
for safeti reason us caution when confront the thief never forget that the
fraudster could be a convict felon who doe not want to go back to prison
feder ident theft statut
there ar two primari feder law that address ident theft the ident theft and
assumpt deterr act and the ident theft penalti enhanc act
ident theft and assumpt deterr act
in octob 1998 congress pass the ident theft and assumpt deterr act
ident theft act to address the problem of ident theft specif the act outlaw the
intent and unauthor us of anoth individu identif with the intent to
commit a crime
it carri a maximum term of 15 year imprison a fine and crimin forfeitur of ani
person properti us or intend to be us to commit the offens the penalti is
increas to a maximum of 30 year imprison if the offens is commit to facilit
an act of terror ident theft scheme mai also involv other violat such as mail
fraud wire fraud credit card fraud or financi institut fraud
violat of the act ar investig by feder investig agenc such as the us secret
servic the fbi and the us postal inspect servic and ar prosecut by the
depart of justic
ident theft penalti enhanc act
in august 2004 congress pass the ident theft penalti enhanc act 18 usc
1028a thi act strengthen feder law on ident theft by creat a crime of aggrav
ident theft aggrav ident theft occur when an individu us a stolen ident to
commit other crime specif thi law provid that where on knowingli transfer
possess or us without law author a mean of identif of anoth dure and
in relat to ani feloni violat ofor relat to fraud embezzl fals statement
and the like an addit term of imprison of two year will be impos on the
individu in april 2005 the unit state sentenc commiss went an extra step to
impos consecut mandatori minimum sentenc of two and five year depend on the
underli offens of misus a stolen identif the guidelin becam effect
novemb 1 2005
consum fraud financi transact
11764 2011 fraud examin manual
see the chapter on the law relat to fraud in the legal section for more inform
about thi act
exampl
a wisconsin man wa sentenc to 21 month imprison and three year supervis
releas after plead guilti to ident theft the defend wa also order to pai
restitut total 62850
the perpetr pled guilti to us anoth man ident to obtain employ with a
clean compani then us that employ to commit a burglari
through hi job at the clean compani the fraudster gain access to the offic of the
wisconsin suprem court where he took six comput monitor own by the state of
wisconsin the monitor were recov almost immedi follow the burglari after the
thief abandon the vehicl that he wa drive
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act which protect custom financi inform held by
bank work in person financ creat privaci oblig for financi institut
specif financi institut have privaci oblig under the act financi privaci
rule and safeguard rule the financi privaci rule requir financi institut to
provid their custom with privaci notic explain the institut polici for
collect and share person financi inform convers the safeguard rule
requir all financi institut to design implement and maintain safeguard to protect the
confidenti and integr of custom person inform
addition the grammleachblilei act includ a provis that prohibit pretext
thi statut make it illeg for anyon to obtain custom inform from financi
institut by imperson someon els or make fals fictiti or fraudul
statement it also prohibit solicit someon els to engag in pretext violat of
thi provis can result in a fine imprison of up to 5 year or both
more inform about other provis of the grammleachblilei act can be found in
the sourc of inform chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin
manual
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11765
red flag rule
on januari 1 2008 the ident theft red flag regul red flag rule which updat
section of the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 becam effect issu
by the feder trade commiss ftc and five feder bank regulatori agenc the red
flag rule requir financi institut and creditor ie bank institut retail
util car dealer etc to develop and implement a written ident theft prevent
program to detect prevent and mitig the risk of ident theft for both new and exist
account in numer industri includ financi servic util health care and
telecommun
the agenc also issu guidelin to assist financi institut and creditor in develop
and implement a program includ a supplement that provid 26 exampl of ident
theft red flag
more inform about the red flag rule can be found in the financi institut
fraud chapter abov
state law
state have also pass law relat to ident theft below is a list of us state and
territori that have pass such law other state mai be consid legisl in their
next legisl session in addit where specif law on ident theft have not been
pass there mai be remedi under other state law
alabama alabama code 13a8192
alaska alaska stat 1146565 570
arizona ariz rev stat 132008
arkansa ark code ann 537227
california cal penal code 53058
colorado colo rev stat 185902
connecticut conn stat 53a129 crimin
conn stat 52571h civil
delawar del code ann tit 5 854
district of columbia dc offici code 2232270204
florida fla stat ann 817568
georgia ga code ann 169120 through 128
guam 9 guam code ann 4680
consum fraud financi transact
11766 2011 fraud examin manual
hawaii hi rev stat 70883968
idaho idaho code 183126 crimin
illinoi 720 ill comp stat 516g13
indiana ind code 3543535
iowa iowa code 715a8 crimin
kansa kan stat ann 214018
kentucki ky rev stat ann 514160
louisiana la rev stat ann 146716
main me rev stat ann tit 17a 905a
maryland md code ann art 27 231
massachusett mass gen law 39737e
michigan mich comp law 44565
minnesota minn stat ann 609527
mississippi miss code ann 971985
missouri mo rev stat 570223
montana mon code ann 456332
nebraska ne rev stat 28608 620
nevada nev rev state 205463465
new hampshir nh rev stat ann 63826
new jersei nj stat ann 2c2117
new mexico nm stat ann 3016241
new york ny cl penal 1907719084
north carolina nc gen stat 141132023
north dakota ndcc 1212311
ohio ohio rev code ann 291349
oklahoma okla stat tit 21 15331
oregon or rev stat 165800
pennsylvania 18 pa con stat 4120
rhode island ri gen law 1149114
south carolina sc code ann 1613510530
south dakota sd codifi law 2230a31
tennesse tca 3914150 crimin
tca 471821012103 2105 civil
texa tex penal code 3251
utah utah code ann 7661101 1104
vermont vermont code 132030
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11767
virginia va code ann 1821863
washington wash rev code 935020
west virginia w va code 61354
wisconsin wi stat 943201
wyom wyo stat ann 63901
us virgin island 14 vi code ann 3003
prevent fals ident fraud
ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel
in septemb 2006 the american nation standard institut ansi and the better
busi bureau bbb establish the ident theft prevent and ident manag standard
panel idsp 4 as a crosssector initi to catalog exist standard relat to ident theft
prevent and to identifi area where addit standard and best practic ar need to
help busi and other organ further prevent ident fraud in januari 2008 the
idsp releas a twovolum report provid a detail inventori of standard and best
practic that can be us to prevent ident theft and a number of recommend for
secur enhanc around the issuanc of ident credenti and the exchang and
mainten of ident data the ansibbb idsp report avail for download at no
charg at wwwansiorgidsp is a us tool for busi govern agenc and other
organ that wish to evalu and augment their current ident theft prevent and
ident manag practic
consum protect measur
how do you protect yourself and your client from ident theft some of the us
method ar
befor provid person inform make sure the individu or busi request
it ha a valid reason for requir the inform
never write your credit card number or social secur number on check or on the
outsid of envelop
dont give account number over the telephon or to personscompani you ar not
familiar with
4 report summari excerpt from final report volum 1 find and recommend publish by
the ansibbb ident theft prevent and ident manag standard panel januari 31 2008
consum fraud financi transact
11768 2011 fraud examin manual
dont us cordless or cellular telephon or email to transmit financi or privat
person inform
keep all financi document in a secur place
if you have your driver licens inform preprint on your check shred cancel
check befor discard them
check your financi inform regularli look for what should and shouldnt
be there
obtain a copi of your credit report on a regular basi
tear up or shred preapprov credit applic
have yourself taken off of prescreen list
mail bill from the post offic or your busi locat
consid have your name and telephon number remov from the telephon
directori or have the address remov
dont provid person inform over the telephon unless you initi the call and
know who you ar speak with
if telemarket compani call tell them under the feder telephon consum
protect act i want to be on your do not call list
keep your birth certif in a safe place
choos password that will be difficult to crack and us differ password for
all account
chang password and pin code often
dont put your social secur number on ani document that you arent legal
requir to
shred ani paper with financi inform and identifi rather than simpli throw
them in the trash
in addit insur compani ar now offer insur for ident theft for an annual
fee the polici cover the cost of clear the policyhold name and correct their
financi record includ legal expens loan reapplic fee telephon and certifi
mail charg notari expens and lost wage for the time it take to deal with the fraud
what to do if your ident is stolen
start keep detail record
file a polic report with your local law enforc agenc and keep a copi of that
report mani bank and credit agenc requir such a report befor thei will
acknowledg that a theft ha occur
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11769
if your wallet or purs is stolen immedi cancel your credit and debit card and get
replac put a stop payment on all lost or stolen check
report unauthor charg and account to the appropri credit issuer and credit
bureau immedi by phone and in write chang account number or close all
account that ar affect by the fraudul activ
check for and repair further breach of your ident
notifi law enforc agenc
feder trade commiss wwwftcgov
feder bureau of investig wwwfbigov
local and state agenc
contact the three primari credit report bureau to have a secur alert or freez
place on your report and request a copi of your credit report and review it for
unauthor account activ
equifax 800 5256285 or 888 7660008
experian formerli trw 888 3973742
tran union 800 6807289
for further inform on identifi theft pleas visit the feder trade commiss
inform page at wwwconsumergovidtheft
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11801
