2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/TAX FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Tax Fraud


:


TAX FRAUD 
 
Introduction 
The most important distinction in determining whether an individual or company has 
committed tax fraud is whether the tax-filing party intentionally filed an improper tax return 
with the federal government. The intent of the party to wrongly file a return will determine 
the difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion. The U.S. courts have determined evasion 
to be unlawful, while avoidance has been deemed lawful. 
 
The definition of tax fraud is 
 
… the actual intentional wrongdoing, and the intent required … to evade a tax believed to 
be owing. Fraud implies bad faith, intentional wrongdoing, and a sinister motive. It is 
never imputed or presumed and the courts will not sustain findings of fraud upon 
circumstances which at most create only suspicion.    
 
This definition tells us that a false tax return is considered fraudulent if the responsible party 
has knowingly attempted to defraud the government of owed tax dollars. In U.S. v. 
Pomponio, the courts further refined the scope of tax fraud by stating that willfulness is “… a 
voluntary, intentional violation of a known legal duty, [that] does not require proof of an evil 
motive.” It can thus be accepted that accidental false tax returns do not qualify as fraudulent 
returns.  
 
Fraudulent Intent  
An example of fraudulent intent is the filing of a tax return in the wrong district, when the 
taxpayer (a CPA) knew or had reason to know the proper district (Spencer D. Lorton v. 
Commissioner, TC Memo 1954–872). 
 
Objectively Reasonable “Good Faith” Misunderstanding of the Law  
Good faith or a legitimate misunderstanding of the requirements of the law negates 
willfulness, [ U.S. v. Cheek, 931 F.2d 1206 (7th Cir 1991), aff’d. 111 U.S. 604 (1991)]. The case 
held, however, that the belief that taxes are in violation of the Constitution was not 
“objectively reasonable” so as to negate willfulness. 
                                                          
114 Mertens, Law of Federal Income Taxation, sec. 55.21, page 64, (1991 Rev);  Ross Glove Co. v. Commissioner, 60 TC 569 (1973). 
2 U.S. v. Pomponio, 429 U.S. 10 (1976); 76-2 USTC 9695. 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1402                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Willfulness can be inferred from conduct, such as: 
• Keeping a double set of books (not to be confused with GAAP and tax records). 
• Making false entries or alterations or creating false invoices or documents. 
• Destruction of books or records. 
• Concealment of assets (illicit income). 
• Covering up sources of income. 
• Avoiding making records usual in transactions of the kind. 
• Conduct that misleads or conceals [ Spies v. U.S., 317 U.S. 492 (1943).]. 
 
 
Hallmarks (Badges) of Fraud 
The courts recognize certain hallmarks or badges of tax fraud. Some of these are: 
• Misrepresentation of facts 
• Artifice 
• Device to hide income or assets 
• Double set of books 
• Secret bank accounts under false names 
• Overstatement of deductions 
• Fictitious transactions 
 
Fraud Is More Than a Mistake in Judgment  
The failure to know and understand the rules of “first in, first out” (FIFO) is not sufficient 
to sustain a fraud charge, Smith v. Commissioner, 40 BTA 387, supplemental opinion 42 BTA 
505. There was no indication in this case that the taxpayer misrepresented any fact, withheld 
any information, or resisted or prevented the discovery by the commissioner of any 
pertinent data. 
 
False Versus Fraudulent 
Definitions of False 
• When “false” appears by itself, and not coupled with a penalty or the creation of an 
offense, then false means incorrect [ Eliot National Bank v. Gill, 218 F. 600 (1st Cir 1914)]. 
• False means it is incorrect, but made in good faith [ National Bank of Commerce in St. Louis 
v. Allen, 223 F. 472 (8th Cir 1915)]. 
• Statements of opinion, as distinguished from those of material fact, are not fraud [ Ohio Brass 
Co. v. Commissioner, 17 BTA 1199 (1929)]. 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1403 
Corporate Fraud  
Corporate fraud  depends on the intent of the corporate officers [Auerbach Shoe Co. v. 
Commissioner, 21 TC 191 (1st Cir. 1953)]. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Charging airline tickets to “air freight” (a false representat ion) coupled with the failure to 
credit refunds for redeemed tickets to the corp oration was sufficient to render the corporate 
returns fraudulent [ Kreps v.  Commissioner, 42 TC 660 (1964) aff’d, 351 F.2d 1 
(2nd Cir 1965)]. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A 40 percent shareholder/officer of a corporation embezzled corporate funds for her 
personal use, then falsified corporate records.  The corporation incorrectly claimed deductions 
based on the false records. The fraud claim was not sustained against the corporation 
[Botwinik Bros. of Mass., Inc. v. Commissioner, 39 TC 988 (1963)]. 
 
Burden of Proof  
In July of 1998, President Clinton signed in to law the IRS Restructuring and Reform Act. 
This Act made sweeping changes in the structure and procedures of the IRS. One of the 
most important changes involves the shift of the burden of proof in civil cases. The general 
rule prior to the Act was that the taxpayer bears the burden of proof at trial in civil 
proceedings. The Statutory Notice of Deficiency (90-day letter) enjoyed the presumption of 
correctness. The presumption of correctness in favor of the IRS required the taxpayer to go 
forward with prima facie evidence to disprove the IRS’s determination. After successfully 
rebutting the presumption of correctness, taxpayers had the burden of proving their case by 
at least a preponderance of the evidence.  
 
However the rule established under the Reform Act is that IRS has the burden of proof in 
civil court proceedings on income, gift, estate, or generation-skipping tax liability with 
respect to factual issues that are relevant to determining the taxpayer’s tax liability, provided 
the taxpayer: (1) provides credible evidence on the factual issue; (2) keeps records and backs 
up items as presently required under the Code and regulations; and (3) cooperates with IRS 
in regard to reasonable requests for meetings, interviews, witnesses, information, and 
documents. Corporations, trusts, and partnerships with a net worth in excess of $7 million 
continue to bear the burden of proof. The Senate Finance Committee Report states that if 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1404                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the taxpayer’s evidence and the IRS’s evidence are equally balanced, the court should find 
that the IRS has not sustained its burden of proof.  
 
Fraud 
Even under the old IRS Code, there was no presumption of correctness afforded the IRS 
when fraud was involved. Therefore, the IRS had the burden of proving fraud [ Armstrong v. 
U.S., 354 F.2d 274; 173 Ct.Cl. 944 (1965)]. If the fraud claim is for more than one year, the 
IRS must show that some part of the underpayment was due to fraud for each year that the 
penalty is added [Professional Services v. Commissioner, 79 TC 888 (1982)]. First, there must be a 
deficiency and second, the deficiency must be substantial [U.S. v. Morse, 491 F.2d 149 (1st Cir 
1974)]. Substantiality  is a question of fact [U.S. v. Marks, 282 F. Supp. 546 (D Or 1966), aff’d  
391 F.2d 210; (9th Cir 1968); cert denied 39 3 U.S. 839 (1968)]. There is controversy about 
whether substantiality applies to the unpaid tax or to unreported income. Fraud penalties 
survive the death of the taxpayer. 
 
 
Civil Versus Criminal 
Although the burden of proving fraud is on the IRS, the primary determinant of whether the 
IRS pursues a civil rather than a criminal fraud charge is what it believes it can prove. There 
also might be budgetary and staffing constraints that might dictate whether a suit is pursued 
civilly or criminally.  
 
The difference between civil and criminal in the view of the IRS is that a civil case never 
ripens into a crime, and criminal offenses involve behavior too insidious to be disposed of 
on a civil basis. Failure to cooperate might raise a civil case to a crime because it might 
demonstrate willful intent. 
 
 
Taxpayer Penalties 
Taxpayers with a tax deficiency may be subject to civil or criminal penalties. The primary 
determinant of whether the IRS pursues a civil rather than a criminal fraud charge is what it 
believes it can prove.  
 
From the IRS’s perspective, a civil case never ripens into a crime, but a criminal offense 
involves behavior too insidious to be disposed of on a civil basis. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1405 
Civil Taxpayer Penalties 
Negligence, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6662 
If a taxpayer’s underpayment is attributable  to negligence or one of the other reasons 
specified in this section, the government may impose an accuracy-related penalty. Negligence 
is strongly indicated where information is omitted on tax returns or deductions are “too 
good to be true.” 
 
If guilty under this law, the government will impose a penalty based on a percentage of the 
underpayment in the case of negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, substantial 
understatement of income tax, substantial valuation misstatement, substantial overstatement 
of pension liabilities, or substantial understatement of estate or gift tax valuations.  
 
Frivolous Return, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6702 
If a taxpayer files a frivolous return — one that is incorrect on its face or one that does not 
contain enough information to determine the tax liability — the government may impose a 
separate $5,000 civil penalty. An example of a frivolous return is one written in Roman 
numerals rather than Arabic numbers. 
 
Fraud, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6663 
If a taxpayer’s underpayment is attributable to fraud, the government may impose a penalty 
of 75 percent of the portion of the underpayment that is attributable to fraud. If, however, 
the taxpayer is successful in proving that a portion of the underpayment is not the result of 
fraud, that portion might still be subject to the negligence penalty.  
 
Criminal Taxpayer Penalties 
Tax Evasion, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7201 
If a taxpayer is found guilty of tax evasion, which is the intentional evasion of tax 
obligations, the government shall impose a penalty of not more than $100,000 ($500,000 in 
the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
There are three elements to the crime of tax evasion. 
 
WILLFULNESS 
A willful and positive attempt to evade or defeat the tax in any manner lifts a misdemeanor to 
a felony [Spies v. United States, 317 U.S. 492 (1943)]. A consistent pattern of not reporting or 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1406                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
underreporting income is sufficient to infer willfulness [United States v. Stone, 770 F.2d 842 (9th 
Cir 1985)]. 
 
EXISTENCE OF A SUBSTANTIAL DEFICIENCY 
There must be a deficiency and that deficiency must be substantial [Lawn v. United States, 355 
U.S. 339. Morse, supra]. Therefore, there must also be a tax liability [§ 7202. But see Marks, 
supra]. 
 
AFFIRMATIVE ACT 
There must be an affirmative act constituting an evasion or attempted evasion of tax 
obligations, but to be found guilty of this felony, one needs only to attempt to evade the tax. 
 
Making a False Return (Tax Perjury), Title 26, U.S.C., § 7206(1) 
This crime occurs when a taxpayer uses false or misleading information on his tax return. 
The elements of this crime include all of the following: 
• The defendant made and subscribed a return, statement, or other document that was 
false with regard to a material matter. 
• The return, statement, or other document contained a written declaration that it was 
made under the penalties of perjury. 
• The defendant did not believe the return, statement, or other document was true and 
correct as to every material matter. 
• The defendant falsely subscribed to the return, statement, or other document willfully, 
with the specific intent to violate the law. 
 
Failure to File and Pay, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7203 
This statute makes it a crime to willfully do any of the following:  
• Fail to pay any tax or estimated tax 
• Fail to file a return 
• Fail to keep required records 
• Fail to supply any required information.  
 
A person convicted under this statute can be fined up to $25,000 ($100,000 in the case of a 
corporation) or sentenced to up to one year in prison in addition to any other penalties. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1407 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States, Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
The criminal tax statutes of the Internal Revenue Code do not include a statute for the crime 
of conspiracy, but tax conspiracies can be prosecuted under the general conspiracy statute 
under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. Code. Section 371 makes it illegal for two or more 
persons to agree to commit an offense against the United States or to defraud any federal 
agency. Conspiracy in tax cases usually involves a conspiracy to commit tax evasion or to file 
false tax returns. 
 
 
Tax Preparer Penalties 
 
Aiding and Abetting Understatement of Taxpayer's Liability, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6701 
The Code imposes a civil penalty on any person who aids or assists, or procures or advises, 
in the preparation or presentation of any tax-related document if the person knows or has 
reason to believe that the document will be used in connection with a material tax matter 
and will result in the understatement of a taxpayer’s liability. The penalty may also be 
imposed if the person acts through an employee or agent by ordering or causing his 
subordinate to act or by failing to prevent his subordinate from acting.  
 
The amount of the penalty is $1,000 for each un derstating taxpayer ($10,000 in the case of a 
corporate client return) per period.  
 
Understatement of Taxpayer's Liability, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6694 
Section 6694 provides a penalty against a return preparer for understating a taxpayer’s 
liability due to an unreasonable position. Understatement means any understatement of the 
net amount payable or any overstatement of the net amount refundable. 
 
Section 6694 provides that unless there is a reasonable cause for an understatement and the 
preparer acted in good faith, a penalty of the greater of $1, 000 or 50 percent of the income 
derived (or to be derived) by the tax return preparer will be assessed against any preparer 
who knew or reasonably should have known that a position taken on a return was: 
• Not realistically possible of being sustained on its merits. 
• Not disclosed under U.S.C., § 6662(d)(2)(B)(ii). 
• A frivolous position. 
 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1408                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, the penalty increases to the greater of $5,000 or 50 percent of the income 
derived (or to be derived) if the understatement is willful or reckless.  
 
Criminal Fraud, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7206(2) 
Aiding or Assisting in the Preparation of a False Return 
Section 7206(2) makes it a crime to aid or assists in the preparation of a false return. Under 
this section, a person is guilty of a felony and may be subject to a fine of up to $100,000 (or 
$500,000 in the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment of up to three years  
 
This felony is without regard to the knowledge or consent of the person(s) authorized or 
required to present the return, affidavit, claim, or other document. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Rudolf deSouza, president and owner of de fense contractor R.D. International, was 
indicted on 86 counts of conspiracy, conversion of government property, money laundering, 
filing false income tax returns, and submitting false claims and false statements. The 
indictment is the result of a three-and-half-year investigation by the Naval Investigative 
Service and the Criminal Investigative Division of the IRS.  
 
According to the indictment, deSouza conspired to inflate the expenses of RDI — and his 
own income — in an effort to impede the IRS. As  part of the conspiracy, he allegedly filed 
false corporate income tax returns for RDI that claimed deductions for salaries that were 
never paid. The indictment says that RDI used an accrual method of accounting, and 
deducted as a business expense salaries that accrued to deSouza. During a five-year period, 
the contractor claimed $490,000  in such deductions. The accrued salaries not paid were 
entered on RDI’s books as loans from an officer. 
 
In addition, the indictment alleges that RDI employees purchased computer equipment from 
a vendor, and then leased it at deSouza’s dire ction to BKS Trading at an inflated price. 
Consequently, RDI billed the government for the cost of the fictitious lease, and did not give 
the computers to the government even though it had been reimbursed for them. Moreover, 
the indictment accuses deSouza of  claiming thousands of dollars worth of personal expenses 
as business expenses. Specifically, he is alleged to have charged the government for trips to 
Disneyland, Disney World, and Canada. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1409 
The money laundering charges involve allegations that deSouza used several bank accounts 
to conduct approximately $900,000 in financial transactions designed to hide corporate 
assets from the bankruptcy court. Specifically, deSouza is accused of having caused 
numerous transfers of money from RDI acco unts to those of GM Technologies. These 
transfers had the effect of reducing the balance of funds in RDI accounts. Further, deSouza 
did not disclose to the bankruptcy court the existence of GM Technologies, his family’s 
controlling interest, or the money transfers fr om RDI. The indictment  also alleges that 
deSouza transferred money from RDI to another family-owned company while the 
bankruptcy petition was pending.  
 
 
Whistleblower Programs 
As part of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, Congress amended section 7623 of 
the Internal Revenue Code to greatly enhance the IRS’s whistleblower program. Under this 
amendment, taxpayers have a statutory right to rewards of 15–30 percent of the collected 
proceeds (taxes, penalties, and interest) for information that leads directly to an 
administrative or judicial action by the Treasury Department. It also provides for up to 10 
percent of the collected proceeds for “less substantial” information. Congress also 
eliminated any cap on the potential amount of recovery by the informant. 
 
To manage this revised reward program, Congress established the IRS Whistleblower Office 
(WBO). This was done in response to complaints that the previous reward program had  
not been effectively managed.  
 
One important note before you pick up the phone to call the IRS: These 15–30 percent 
recoveries do not apply to smaller, individual cases. These larger percentage rewards do not 
apply to reports against individuals who make less than $200,000 and whose tax liability is 
less than $2 million. The rules do apply to all other individuals and entities. 
  
 
Defenses for Tax Fraud 
 
No Deficiency 
To prove innocence of tax fraud matters, the defendant can establish that there is no 
deficiency. If there is no deficiency, there is no tax liability.  
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1410                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Lack of Willfulness 
A lack of willfulness reduces the defendant’s culpability for fraud. 
 
Avoidance Not Evasion 
In contrast to tax fraud, which refers to illegal methods of tax reduction, tax avoidance refers 
to a legal means of lowering one’s tax bill through legitimate deductions, credits, and 
shelters. Thus, establishing that the taxpayer was engaging in tax avoidance and not evasion 
provides a defense to tax fraud.  
 
Objectively Reasonable Position 
A defendant might also claim that he took an “objectively reasonable” position with respect 
to the tax return.  
 
Claim of Right Doctrine 
In the United States, a taxpayer must recognize income if he receives the income, even if he 
does not have a fixed right to the income. Thus, a taxpayer may seek to evade paying their 
income tax by claiming that he does not have an unrestricted right to the money at issue.  
 
Other Defenses 
Mental Illness 
This defense is applicable in regard to the time the return was prepared. 
 
Incompetent Bookkeeper 
[Josey v. Commissioner, TC Memo 1956-153.] In one case a bookkeeper “filed” the tax return 
by putting it in a file cabinet rather than sending it to the Internal Revenue Service. 
 
Ignorance of the Law 
[Rutana v. Commissioner, TC Memo 1986-336.] A court has held that consideration must be 
given to the intelligence and expertise of the taxpayer. 
 
Innocent Spouse 
Innocent spouse relief permits a spouse to avoid tax liability. Under this doctrine, a spouse 
may be excused from tax liability for tax or tax penalties if a joint tax return was filed and the  
spouse can establish the following elements:  
• The underpayment of tax is due to unreported income or disallowed deductions that are 
attributable to the other spouse  
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1411 
• The spouse “did not know and did not have reason to know” of the facts surrounding 
the underpayment of tax.  
 
Additionally, innocent spouses may obtain relief for “erroneous” income items.  
 
Reliance on an Attorney or Accountant 
One can assert a defense of reliance on an attorney or accountant if all of the following 
conditions are met: 
• The reliance is specific. 
• The expert is qualified, which is determined by a facts and circumstances test. 
• Full disclosure to the expert is required. 
 
Inappropriate Defenses 
Some defenses are inappropriate. They include those discussed below. 
 
Amended or Delinquent Return 
A taxpayer will receive no mitigation of penalties for filing an amended or delinquent return. 
[Badaracco v. Commissioner, 464 U.S. 386 (1984).] 
 
Statute of Limitations 
The three-year Statute of Limitations does not apply to tax fraud. [U.S.C., § 6501(c).] 
 
Death of Taxpayer 
Fraud penalties survive the death of the taxpayer. [Helvering v. Mitchell, 303 U.S. 391 (1938); 
Rev. Rule 73 -293, 1973-2 C.B. 413.] 
 
Bankruptcy
Taxes owed as a result of filing fraudulent federal income tax returns are not dischargeable in 
bankruptcy. [11, U.S.C., Sec. 523(a)(1)(c). In Re: Harris, 59 BR 545 (BC-DC Va. 1986); Rev. 
Rule 87-99, 1987-2 C.B. 291.] 
 
 
Evidence of Tax Fraud 
Evidence of tax fraud may be direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence includes testimony that 
tends to prove or disprove a fact in issue directly, such as eyewitness testimony or a 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1412                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
confession. Circumstantial evidence is evidence that tends to prove or disprove facts in issue 
indirectly, by inference. 
 
Direct Evidence 
Certain circumstances constitute direct evidence of tax fraud, including: 
• Unexplained bank deposits (e.g., using bank accounts in another person’s name or a 
fictitious name) 
• Submission of false documents (e.g., if a taxpayer claims medical deductions but cannot 
provide any evidence that he had seen or paid the bills) 
• False explanations for prior conduct (e.g., the taxpayer destroyed his company’s cash 
register tapes, which were the only records for the company’s sales) 
• Participation in an illegal business (e.g., over several years, a taxpayer who ran an illegal 
lottery substantially underreported his income) 
• False claims of extra withholding exemptions (e.g., a taxpayer claimed 50 withholding 
exemptions, but could not substantiate that he was entitled to claim them) 
 
Circumstantial Evidence 
Certain circumstances constitute circumstantial evidence of tax fraud, including: 
• Illicit income, which can be proved by showing that the subject’s assets or expenditures 
for a given period exceed that which can be accounted for from admitted sources of 
income  
• Income in excess of deposits (e.g., audits of service industry people in Texas led to 
assessments of several thousand dollars in back taxas and penalties) 
 
 
Other Legal Elements of Tax Fraud 
Embezzled Money is immediately income to the embezzler even though he is under a duty 
to repay it, but upon repayment, the embezzler gets a deduction for the repayment. For 
example, in Stephens v. Commissioner, 905 F2d 667 (7th Cir. 1990), a taxpayer embezzled about 
$530,000 from his employer (Raytheon) and recorded it on his tax return as “consulting 
income.” The taxpayer was ordered to pay restitution to Raytheon plus interest. He was 
allowed deductions under IRS Code section 165 (c)(2), relating to ordinary and necessary 
business expense for the restitution amount in the year paid. But the court did not allow a 
deduction for the interest. 
  
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1501 



:


tax fraud
introduct
the most import distinct in determin whether an individu or compani ha
commit tax fraud is whether the taxfil parti intention file an improp tax return
with the feder govern the intent of the parti to wrongli file a return will determin
the differ between tax avoid and tax evas the us court have determin evas
to be unlaw while avoid ha been deem law
the definit of tax fraud is
the actual intent wrongdo and the intent requir to evad a tax believ to
be ow fraud impli bad faith intent wrongdo and a sinist motiv it is
never imput or presum and the court will not sustain find of fraud upon
circumst which at most creat onli suspicion
thi definit tell us that a fals tax return is consid fraudul if the respons parti
ha knowingli attempt to defraud the govern of ow tax dollar in us v
pomponio the court further refin the scope of tax fraud by state that will is a
voluntari intent violat of a known legal duti that doe not requir proof of an evil
motiv it can thu be accept that accident fals tax return do not qualifi as fraudul
return
fraudul intent
an exampl of fraudul intent is the file of a tax return in the wrong district when the
taxpay a cpa knew or had reason to know the proper district spencer d lorton v
commission tc memo 1954872
object reason good faith misunderstand of the law
good faith or a legitim misunderstand of the requir of the law negat
will us v cheek 931 f2d 1206 7th cir 1991 affd 111 us 604 1991 the case
held howev that the belief that tax ar in violat of the constitut wa not
object reason so as to negat will
114 merten law of feder incom taxat sec 5521 page 64 1991 rev ross glove co v commission 60 tc 569 1973
2 us v pomponio 429 us 10 1976 762 ustc 9695
tax fraud financi transact
11402 2011 fraud examin manual
will can be infer from conduct such as
keep a doubl set of book not to be confus with gaap and tax record
make fals entri or alter or creat fals invoic or document
destruct of book or record
conceal of asset illicit incom
cover up sourc of incom
avoid make record usual in transact of the kind
conduct that mislead or conceal spi v us 317 us 492 1943
hallmark badg of fraud
the court recogn certain hallmark or badg of tax fraud some of these ar
misrepresent of fact
artific
devic to hide incom or asset
doubl set of book
secret bank account under fals name
overstat of deduct
fictiti transact
fraud is more than a mistak in judgment
the failur to know and understand the rule of first in first out fifo is not suffici
to sustain a fraud charg smith v commission 40 bta 387 supplement opinion 42 bta
505 there wa no indic in thi case that the taxpay misrepres ani fact withheld
ani inform or resist or prevent the discoveri by the commission of ani
pertin data
fals versu fraudul
definit of fals
when fals appear by itself and not coupl with a penalti or the creation of an
offens then fals mean incorrect eliot nation bank v gill 218 f 600 1st cir 1914
fals mean it is incorrect but made in good faith nation bank of commerc in st loui
v allen 223 f 472 8th cir 1915
statement of opinion as distinguish from those of materi fact ar not fraud ohio brass
co v commission 17 bta 1199 1929
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11403
corpor fraud
corpor fraud depend on the intent of the corpor offic auerbach shoe co v
commission 21 tc 191 1st cir 1953
exampl
charg airlin ticket to air freight a fals representat ion coupl with the failur to
credit refund for redeem ticket to the corp orat wa suffici to render the corpor
return fraudul krep v commission 42 tc 660 1964 affd 351 f2d 1
2nd cir 1965
exampl
a 40 percent shareholderoffic of a corpor embezzl corpor fund for her
person us then falsifi corpor record the corpor incorrectli claim deduct
base on the fals record the fraud claim wa not sustain against the corpor
botwinik bro of mass inc v commission 39 tc 988 1963
burden of proof
in juli of 1998 presid clinton sign in to law the ir restructur and reform act
thi act made sweep chang in the structur and procedur of the ir on of the
most import chang involv the shift of the burden of proof in civil case the gener
rule prior to the act wa that the taxpay bear the burden of proof at trial in civil
proceed the statutori notic of defici 90dai letter enjoi the presumpt of
correct the presumpt of correct in favor of the ir requir the taxpay to go
forward with prima faci evid to disprov the irss determin after successfulli
rebut the presumpt of correct taxpay had the burden of prove their case by
at least a preponder of the evid
howev the rule establish under the reform act is that ir ha the burden of proof in
civil court proceed on incom gift estat or generationskip tax liabil with
respect to factual issu that ar relev to determin the taxpay tax liabil provid
the taxpay 1 provid credibl evid on the factual issu 2 keep record and back
up item as present requir under the code and regul and 3 cooper with ir
in regard to reason request for meet interview wit inform and
document corpor trust and partnership with a net worth in excess of 7 million
continu to bear the burden of proof the senat financ committe report state that if
tax fraud financi transact
11404 2011 fraud examin manual
the taxpay evid and the irss evid ar equal balanc the court should find
that the ir ha not sustain it burden of proof
fraud
even under the old ir code there wa no presumpt of correct afford the ir
when fraud wa involv therefor the ir had the burden of prove fraud armstrong v
us 354 f2d 274 173 ctcl 944 1965 if the fraud claim is for more than on year the
ir must show that some part of the underpay wa due to fraud for each year that the
penalti is ad profession servic v commission 79 tc 888 1982 first there must be a
defici and second the defici must be substanti us v mors 491 f2d 149 1st cir
1974 substanti is a question of fact us v mark 282 f supp 546 d or 1966 affd
391 f2d 210 9th cir 1968 cert deni 39 3 us 839 1968 there is controversi about
whether substanti appli to the unpaid tax or to unreport incom fraud penalti
surviv the death of the taxpay
civil versu crimin
although the burden of prove fraud is on the ir the primari determin of whether the
ir pursu a civil rather than a crimin fraud charg is what it believ it can prove there
also might be budgetari and staf constraint that might dictat whether a suit is pursu
civilli or crimin
the differ between civil and crimin in the view of the ir is that a civil case never
ripen into a crime and crimin offens involv behavior too insidi to be dispos of
on a civil basi failur to cooper might rais a civil case to a crime becaus it might
demonstr will intent
taxpay penalti
taxpay with a tax defici mai be subject to civil or crimin penalti the primari
determin of whether the ir pursu a civil rather than a crimin fraud charg is what it
believ it can prove
from the irss perspect a civil case never ripen into a crime but a crimin offens
involv behavior too insidi to be dispos of on a civil basi
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11405
civil taxpay penalti
neglig titl 26 usc 6662
if a taxpay underpay is attribut to neglig or on of the other reason
specifi in thi section the govern mai impos an accuracyrel penalti neglig
is strongli indic where inform is omit on tax return or deduct ar too
good to be true
if guilti under thi law the govern will impos a penalti base on a percentag of the
underpay in the case of neglig or disregard of rule and regul substanti
understat of incom tax substanti valuat misstat substanti overstat
of pension liabil or substanti understat of estat or gift tax valuat
frivol return titl 26 usc 6702
if a taxpay file a frivol return on that is incorrect on it face or on that doe not
contain enough inform to determin the tax liabil the govern mai impos a
separ 5000 civil penalti an exampl of a frivol return is on written in roman
numer rather than arab number
fraud titl 26 usc 6663
if a taxpay underpay is attribut to fraud the govern mai impos a penalti
of 75 percent of the portion of the underpay that is attribut to fraud if howev
the taxpay is success in prove that a portion of the underpay is not the result of
fraud that portion might still be subject to the neglig penalti
crimin taxpay penalti
tax evas titl 26 usc 7201
if a taxpay is found guilti of tax evas which is the intent evas of tax
oblig the govern shall impos a penalti of not more than 100000 500000 in
the case of a corpor andor imprison for not more than five year
there ar three element to the crime of tax evas
will
a will and posit attempt to evad or defeat the tax in ani manner lift a misdemeanor to
a feloni spi v unit state 317 us 492 1943 a consist pattern of not report or
tax fraud financi transact
11406 2011 fraud examin manual
underreport incom is suffici to infer will unit state v stone 770 f2d 842 9th
cir 1985
exist of a substanti defici
there must be a defici and that defici must be substanti lawn v unit state 355
us 339 mors supra therefor there must also be a tax liabil 7202 but see mark
supra
affirm act
there must be an affirm act constitut an evas or attempt evas of tax
oblig but to be found guilti of thi feloni on need onli to attempt to evad the tax
make a fals return tax perjuri titl 26 usc 72061
thi crime occur when a taxpay us fals or mislead inform on hi tax return
the element of thi crime includ all of the follow
the defend made and subscrib a return statement or other document that wa
fals with regard to a materi matter
the return statement or other document contain a written declar that it wa
made under the penalti of perjuri
the defend did not believ the return statement or other document wa true and
correct as to everi materi matter
the defend fals subscrib to the return statement or other document willfulli
with the specif intent to violat the law
failur to file and pai titl 26 usc 7203
thi statut make it a crime to willfulli do ani of the follow
fail to pai ani tax or estim tax
fail to file a return
fail to keep requir record
fail to suppli ani requir inform
a person convict under thi statut can be fine up to 25000 100000 in the case of a
corpor or sentenc to up to on year in prison in addit to ani other penalti
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11407
conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
the crimin tax statut of the intern revenu code do not includ a statut for the crime
of conspiraci but tax conspiraci can be prosecut under the gener conspiraci statut
under section 371 of titl 18 us code section 371 make it illeg for two or more
person to agre to commit an offens against the unit state or to defraud ani feder
agenc conspiraci in tax case usual involv a conspiraci to commit tax evas or to file
fals tax return
tax prepar penalti
aid and abet understat of taxpay liabil titl 26 usc 6701
the code impos a civil penalti on ani person who aid or assist or procur or advis
in the prepar or present of ani taxrel document if the person know or ha
reason to believ that the document will be us in connect with a materi tax matter
and will result in the understat of a taxpay liabil the penalti mai also be
impos if the person act through an employe or agent by order or caus hi
subordin to act or by fail to prevent hi subordin from act
the amount of the penalti is 1000 for each un derstat taxpay 10000 in the case of a
corpor client return per period
understat of taxpay liabil titl 26 usc 6694
section 6694 provid a penalti against a return prepar for underst a taxpay
liabil due to an unreason posit understat mean ani understat of the
net amount payabl or ani overstat of the net amount refund
section 6694 provid that unless there is a reason caus for an understat and the
prepar act in good faith a penalti of the greater of 1 000 or 50 percent of the incom
deriv or to be deriv by the tax return prepar will be assess against ani prepar
who knew or reason should have known that a posit taken on a return wa
not realist possibl of be sustain on it merit
not disclos under usc 6662d2bii
a frivol posit
tax fraud financi transact
11408 2011 fraud examin manual
addition the penalti increas to the greater of 5000 or 50 percent of the incom
deriv or to be deriv if the understat is will or reckless
crimin fraud titl 26 usc 72062
aid or assist in the prepar of a fals return
section 72062 make it a crime to aid or assist in the prepar of a fals return under
thi section a person is guilti of a feloni and mai be subject to a fine of up to 100000 or
500000 in the case of a corpor andor imprison of up to three year
thi feloni is without regard to the knowledg or consent of the person author or
requir to present the return affidavit claim or other document
exampl
rudolf desouza presid and owner of de fens contractor rd intern wa
indict on 86 count of conspiraci convers of govern properti monei launder
file fals incom tax return and submit fals claim and fals statement the
indict is the result of a threeandhalfyear investig by the naval investig
servic and the crimin investig divis of the ir
accord to the indict desouza conspir to inflat the expens of rdi and hi
own incom in an effort to imped the ir as part of the conspiraci he allegedli file
fals corpor incom tax return for rdi that claim deduct for salari that were
never paid the indict sai that rdi us an accrual method of account and
deduct as a busi expens salari that accru to desouza dure a fiveyear period
the contractor claim 490000 in such deduct the accru salari not paid were
enter on rdi book as loan from an offic
in addit the indict alleg that rdi employe purchas comput equip from
a vendor and then leas it at desouza dire ction to bk trade at an inflat price
consequ rdi bill the govern for the cost of the fictiti leas and did not give
the comput to the govern even though it had been reimburs for them moreov
the indict accus desouza of claim thousand of dollar worth of person expens
as busi expens specif he is alleg to have charg the govern for trip to
disneyland disnei world and canada
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11409
the monei launder charg involv alleg that desouza us sever bank account
to conduct approxim 900000 in financi transact design to hide corpor
asset from the bankruptci court specif desouza is accus of have caus
numer transfer of monei from rdi acco unt to those of gm technolog these
transfer had the effect of reduc the balanc of fund in rdi account further desouza
did not disclos to the bankruptci court the exist of gm technolog hi famili
control interest or the monei transfer fr om rdi the indict also alleg that
desouza transfer monei from rdi to anoth familyown compani while the
bankruptci petit wa pend
whistleblow program
as part of the tax relief and health care act of 2006 congress amend section 7623 of
the intern revenu code to greatli enhanc the irss whistleblow program under thi
amend taxpay have a statutori right to reward of 1530 percent of the collect
proce tax penalti and interest for inform that lead directli to an
administr or judici action by the treasuri depart it also provid for up to 10
percent of the collect proce for less substanti inform congress also
elimin ani cap on the potenti amount of recoveri by the inform
to manag thi revis reward program congress establish the ir whistleblow offic
wbo thi wa done in respons to complaint that the previou reward program had
not been effect manag
on import note befor you pick up the phone to call the ir these 1530 percent
recoveri do not appli to smaller individu case these larger percentag reward do not
appli to report against individu who make less than 200000 and whose tax liabil is
less than 2 million the rule do appli to all other individu and entiti
defens for tax fraud
no defici
to prove innoc of tax fraud matter the defend can establish that there is no
defici if there is no defici there is no tax liabil
tax fraud financi transact
11410 2011 fraud examin manual
lack of will
a lack of will reduc the defend culpabl for fraud
avoid not evas
in contrast to tax fraud which refer to illeg method of tax reduct tax avoid refer
to a legal mean of lower on tax bill through legitim deduct credit and
shelter thu establish that the taxpay wa engag in tax avoid and not evas
provid a defens to tax fraud
object reason posit
a defend might also claim that he took an object reason posit with respect
to the tax return
claim of right doctrin
in the unit state a taxpay must recogn incom if he receiv the incom even if he
doe not have a fix right to the incom thu a taxpay mai seek to evad pai their
incom tax by claim that he doe not have an unrestrict right to the monei at issu
other defens
mental ill
thi defens is applic in regard to the time the return wa prepar
incompet bookkeep
josei v commission tc memo 1956153 in on case a bookkeep file the tax return
by put it in a file cabinet rather than send it to the intern revenu servic
ignor of the law
rutana v commission tc memo 1986336 a court ha held that consider must be
given to the intellig and expertis of the taxpay
innoc spous
innoc spous relief permit a spous to avoid tax liabil under thi doctrin a spous
mai be excus from tax liabil for tax or tax penalti if a joint tax return wa file and the
spous can establish the follow element
the underpay of tax is due to unreport incom or disallow deduct that ar
attribut to the other spous
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11411
the spous did not know and did not have reason to know of the fact surround
the underpay of tax
addition innoc spous mai obtain relief for erron incom item
relianc on an attornei or account
on can assert a defens of relianc on an attornei or account if all of the follow
condit ar met
the relianc is specif
the expert is qualifi which is determin by a fact and circumst test
full disclosur to the expert is requir
inappropri defens
some defens ar inappropri thei includ those discuss below
amend or delinqu return
a taxpay will receiv no mitig of penalti for file an amend or delinqu return
badaracco v commission 464 us 386 1984
statut of limit
the threeyear statut of limit doe not appli to tax fraud usc 6501c
death of taxpay
fraud penalti surviv the death of the taxpay helver v mitchel 303 us 391 1938
rev rule 73 293 19732 cb 413
bankruptci
tax ow as a result of file fraudul feder incom tax return ar not discharg in
bankruptci 11 usc sec 523a1c in re harri 59 br 545 bcdc va 1986 rev
rule 8799 19872 cb 291
evid of tax fraud
evid of tax fraud mai be direct or circumstanti direct evid includ testimoni that
tend to prove or disprov a fact in issu directli such as eyewit testimoni or a
tax fraud financi transact
11412 2011 fraud examin manual
confess circumstanti evid is evid that tend to prove or disprov fact in issu
indirectli by infer
direct evid
certain circumst constitut direct evid of tax fraud includ
unexplain bank deposit eg us bank account in anoth person name or a
fictiti name
submiss of fals document eg if a taxpay claim medic deduct but cannot
provid ani evid that he had seen or paid the bill
fals explan for prior conduct eg the taxpay destroi hi compani cash
regist tape which were the onli record for the compani sale
particip in an illeg busi eg over sever year a taxpay who ran an illeg
lotteri substanti underreport hi incom
fals claim of extra withhold exempt eg a taxpay claim 50 withhold
exempt but could not substanti that he wa entitl to claim them
circumstanti evid
certain circumst constitut circumstanti evid of tax fraud includ
illicit incom which can be prove by show that the subject asset or expenditur
for a given period exce that which can be account for from admit sourc of
incom
incom in excess of deposit eg audit of servic industri peopl in texa led to
assess of sever thousand dollar in back taxa and penalti
other legal element of tax fraud
embezzl monei is immedi incom to the embezzl even though he is under a duti
to repai it but upon repay the embezzl get a deduct for the repay for
exampl in stephen v commission 905 f2d 667 7th cir 1990 a taxpay embezzl about
530000 from hi employ raytheon and record it on hi tax return as consult
incom the taxpay wa order to pai restitut to raytheon plu interest he wa
allow deduct under ir code section 165 c2 relat to ordinari and necessari
busi expens for the restitut amount in the year paid but the court did not allow a
deduct for the interest
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11501
