2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/TAX FRAUD/Taxpayer Penalties


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Tax Fraud


:


Taxpayer Penalties 
Taxpayers with a tax deficiency may be subject to civil or criminal penalties. The primary 
determinant of whether the IRS pursues a civil rather than a criminal fraud charge is what it 
believes it can prove.  
 
From the IRS’s perspective, a civil case never ripens into a crime, but a criminal offense 
involves behavior too insidious to be disposed of on a civil basis. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1405 
Civil Taxpayer Penalties 
Negligence, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6662 
If a taxpayer’s underpayment is attributable  to negligence or one of the other reasons 
specified in this section, the government may impose an accuracy-related penalty. Negligence 
is strongly indicated where information is omitted on tax returns or deductions are “too 
good to be true.” 
 
If guilty under this law, the government will impose a penalty based on a percentage of the 
underpayment in the case of negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, substantial 
understatement of income tax, substantial valuation misstatement, substantial overstatement 
of pension liabilities, or substantial understatement of estate or gift tax valuations.  
 
Frivolous Return, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6702 
If a taxpayer files a frivolous return — one that is incorrect on its face or one that does not 
contain enough information to determine the tax liability — the government may impose a 
separate $5,000 civil penalty. An example of a frivolous return is one written in Roman 
numerals rather than Arabic numbers. 
 
Fraud, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6663 
If a taxpayer’s underpayment is attributable to fraud, the government may impose a penalty 
of 75 percent of the portion of the underpayment that is attributable to fraud. If, however, 
the taxpayer is successful in proving that a portion of the underpayment is not the result of 
fraud, that portion might still be subject to the negligence penalty.  
 
Criminal Taxpayer Penalties 
Tax Evasion, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7201 
If a taxpayer is found guilty of tax evasion, which is the intentional evasion of tax 
obligations, the government shall impose a penalty of not more than $100,000 ($500,000 in 
the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
There are three elements to the crime of tax evasion. 
 
WILLFULNESS 
A willful and positive attempt to evade or defeat the tax in any manner lifts a misdemeanor to 
a felony [Spies v. United States, 317 U.S. 492 (1943)]. A consistent pattern of not reporting or 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1406                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
underreporting income is sufficient to infer willfulness [United States v. Stone, 770 F.2d 842 (9th 
Cir 1985)]. 
 
EXISTENCE OF A SUBSTANTIAL DEFICIENCY 
There must be a deficiency and that deficiency must be substantial [Lawn v. United States, 355 
U.S. 339. Morse, supra]. Therefore, there must also be a tax liability [§ 7202. But see Marks, 
supra]. 
 
AFFIRMATIVE ACT 
There must be an affirmative act constituting an evasion or attempted evasion of tax 
obligations, but to be found guilty of this felony, one needs only to attempt to evade the tax. 
 
Making a False Return (Tax Perjury), Title 26, U.S.C., § 7206(1) 
This crime occurs when a taxpayer uses false or misleading information on his tax return. 
The elements of this crime include all of the following: 
• The defendant made and subscribed a return, statement, or other document that was 
false with regard to a material matter. 
• The return, statement, or other document contained a written declaration that it was 
made under the penalties of perjury. 
• The defendant did not believe the return, statement, or other document was true and 
correct as to every material matter. 
• The defendant falsely subscribed to the return, statement, or other document willfully, 
with the specific intent to violate the law. 
 
Failure to File and Pay, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7203 
This statute makes it a crime to willfully do any of the following:  
• Fail to pay any tax or estimated tax 
• Fail to file a return 
• Fail to keep required records 
• Fail to supply any required information.  
 
A person convicted under this statute can be fined up to $25,000 ($100,000 in the case of a 
corporation) or sentenced to up to one year in prison in addition to any other penalties. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1407 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States, Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
The criminal tax statutes of the Internal Revenue Code do not include a statute for the crime 
of conspiracy, but tax conspiracies can be prosecuted under the general conspiracy statute 
under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. Code. Section 371 makes it illegal for two or more 
persons to agree to commit an offense against the United States or to defraud any federal 
agency. Conspiracy in tax cases usually involves a conspiracy to commit tax evasion or to file 
false tax returns. 
 
 



:


taxpay penalti
taxpay with a tax defici mai be subject to civil or crimin penalti the primari
determin of whether the ir pursu a civil rather than a crimin fraud charg is what it
believ it can prove
from the irss perspect a civil case never ripen into a crime but a crimin offens
involv behavior too insidi to be dispos of on a civil basi
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11405
civil taxpay penalti
neglig titl 26 usc 6662
if a taxpay underpay is attribut to neglig or on of the other reason
specifi in thi section the govern mai impos an accuracyrel penalti neglig
is strongli indic where inform is omit on tax return or deduct ar too
good to be true
if guilti under thi law the govern will impos a penalti base on a percentag of the
underpay in the case of neglig or disregard of rule and regul substanti
understat of incom tax substanti valuat misstat substanti overstat
of pension liabil or substanti understat of estat or gift tax valuat
frivol return titl 26 usc 6702
if a taxpay file a frivol return on that is incorrect on it face or on that doe not
contain enough inform to determin the tax liabil the govern mai impos a
separ 5000 civil penalti an exampl of a frivol return is on written in roman
numer rather than arab number
fraud titl 26 usc 6663
if a taxpay underpay is attribut to fraud the govern mai impos a penalti
of 75 percent of the portion of the underpay that is attribut to fraud if howev
the taxpay is success in prove that a portion of the underpay is not the result of
fraud that portion might still be subject to the neglig penalti
crimin taxpay penalti
tax evas titl 26 usc 7201
if a taxpay is found guilti of tax evas which is the intent evas of tax
oblig the govern shall impos a penalti of not more than 100000 500000 in
the case of a corpor andor imprison for not more than five year
there ar three element to the crime of tax evas
will
a will and posit attempt to evad or defeat the tax in ani manner lift a misdemeanor to
a feloni spi v unit state 317 us 492 1943 a consist pattern of not report or
tax fraud financi transact
11406 2011 fraud examin manual
underreport incom is suffici to infer will unit state v stone 770 f2d 842 9th
cir 1985
exist of a substanti defici
there must be a defici and that defici must be substanti lawn v unit state 355
us 339 mors supra therefor there must also be a tax liabil 7202 but see mark
supra
affirm act
there must be an affirm act constitut an evas or attempt evas of tax
oblig but to be found guilti of thi feloni on need onli to attempt to evad the tax
make a fals return tax perjuri titl 26 usc 72061
thi crime occur when a taxpay us fals or mislead inform on hi tax return
the element of thi crime includ all of the follow
the defend made and subscrib a return statement or other document that wa
fals with regard to a materi matter
the return statement or other document contain a written declar that it wa
made under the penalti of perjuri
the defend did not believ the return statement or other document wa true and
correct as to everi materi matter
the defend fals subscrib to the return statement or other document willfulli
with the specif intent to violat the law
failur to file and pai titl 26 usc 7203
thi statut make it a crime to willfulli do ani of the follow
fail to pai ani tax or estim tax
fail to file a return
fail to keep requir record
fail to suppli ani requir inform
a person convict under thi statut can be fine up to 25000 100000 in the case of a
corpor or sentenc to up to on year in prison in addit to ani other penalti
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11407
conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
the crimin tax statut of the intern revenu code do not includ a statut for the crime
of conspiraci but tax conspiraci can be prosecut under the gener conspiraci statut
under section 371 of titl 18 us code section 371 make it illeg for two or more
person to agre to commit an offens against the unit state or to defraud ani feder
agenc conspiraci in tax case usual involv a conspiraci to commit tax evas or to file
fals tax return
