2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/TAX FRAUD/Tax Preparer Penalties


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Tax Fraud


:


Tax Preparer Penalties 
 
Aiding and Abetting Understatement of Taxpayer's Liability, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6701 
The Code imposes a civil penalty on any person who aids or assists, or procures or advises, 
in the preparation or presentation of any tax-related document if the person knows or has 
reason to believe that the document will be used in connection with a material tax matter 
and will result in the understatement of a taxpayer’s liability. The penalty may also be 
imposed if the person acts through an employee or agent by ordering or causing his 
subordinate to act or by failing to prevent his subordinate from acting.  
 
The amount of the penalty is $1,000 for each un derstating taxpayer ($10,000 in the case of a 
corporate client return) per period.  
 
Understatement of Taxpayer's Liability, Title 26, U.S.C., § 6694 
Section 6694 provides a penalty against a return preparer for understating a taxpayer’s 
liability due to an unreasonable position. Understatement means any understatement of the 
net amount payable or any overstatement of the net amount refundable. 
 
Section 6694 provides that unless there is a reasonable cause for an understatement and the 
preparer acted in good faith, a penalty of the greater of $1, 000 or 50 percent of the income 
derived (or to be derived) by the tax return preparer will be assessed against any preparer 
who knew or reasonably should have known that a position taken on a return was: 
• Not realistically possible of being sustained on its merits. 
• Not disclosed under U.S.C., § 6662(d)(2)(B)(ii). 
• A frivolous position. 
 
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1408                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, the penalty increases to the greater of $5,000 or 50 percent of the income 
derived (or to be derived) if the understatement is willful or reckless.  
 
Criminal Fraud, Title 26, U.S.C., § 7206(2) 
Aiding or Assisting in the Preparation of a False Return 
Section 7206(2) makes it a crime to aid or assists in the preparation of a false return. Under 
this section, a person is guilty of a felony and may be subject to a fine of up to $100,000 (or 
$500,000 in the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment of up to three years  
 
This felony is without regard to the knowledge or consent of the person(s) authorized or 
required to present the return, affidavit, claim, or other document. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Rudolf deSouza, president and owner of de fense contractor R.D. International, was 
indicted on 86 counts of conspiracy, conversion of government property, money laundering, 
filing false income tax returns, and submitting false claims and false statements. The 
indictment is the result of a three-and-half-year investigation by the Naval Investigative 
Service and the Criminal Investigative Division of the IRS.  
 
According to the indictment, deSouza conspired to inflate the expenses of RDI — and his 
own income — in an effort to impede the IRS. As  part of the conspiracy, he allegedly filed 
false corporate income tax returns for RDI that claimed deductions for salaries that were 
never paid. The indictment says that RDI used an accrual method of accounting, and 
deducted as a business expense salaries that accrued to deSouza. During a five-year period, 
the contractor claimed $490,000  in such deductions. The accrued salaries not paid were 
entered on RDI’s books as loans from an officer. 
 
In addition, the indictment alleges that RDI employees purchased computer equipment from 
a vendor, and then leased it at deSouza’s dire ction to BKS Trading at an inflated price. 
Consequently, RDI billed the government for the cost of the fictitious lease, and did not give 
the computers to the government even though it had been reimbursed for them. Moreover, 
the indictment accuses deSouza of  claiming thousands of dollars worth of personal expenses 
as business expenses. Specifically, he is alleged to have charged the government for trips to 
Disneyland, Disney World, and Canada. 
 
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1409 
The money laundering charges involve allegations that deSouza used several bank accounts 
to conduct approximately $900,000 in financial transactions designed to hide corporate 
assets from the bankruptcy court. Specifically, deSouza is accused of having caused 
numerous transfers of money from RDI acco unts to those of GM Technologies. These 
transfers had the effect of reducing the balance of funds in RDI accounts. Further, deSouza 
did not disclose to the bankruptcy court the existence of GM Technologies, his family’s 
controlling interest, or the money transfers fr om RDI. The indictment  also alleges that 
deSouza transferred money from RDI to another family-owned company while the 
bankruptcy petition was pending.  
 
 



:


tax prepar penalti
aid and abet understat of taxpay liabil titl 26 usc 6701
the code impos a civil penalti on ani person who aid or assist or procur or advis
in the prepar or present of ani taxrel document if the person know or ha
reason to believ that the document will be us in connect with a materi tax matter
and will result in the understat of a taxpay liabil the penalti mai also be
impos if the person act through an employe or agent by order or caus hi
subordin to act or by fail to prevent hi subordin from act
the amount of the penalti is 1000 for each un derstat taxpay 10000 in the case of a
corpor client return per period
understat of taxpay liabil titl 26 usc 6694
section 6694 provid a penalti against a return prepar for underst a taxpay
liabil due to an unreason posit understat mean ani understat of the
net amount payabl or ani overstat of the net amount refund
section 6694 provid that unless there is a reason caus for an understat and the
prepar act in good faith a penalti of the greater of 1 000 or 50 percent of the incom
deriv or to be deriv by the tax return prepar will be assess against ani prepar
who knew or reason should have known that a posit taken on a return wa
not realist possibl of be sustain on it merit
not disclos under usc 6662d2bii
a frivol posit
tax fraud financi transact
11408 2011 fraud examin manual
addition the penalti increas to the greater of 5000 or 50 percent of the incom
deriv or to be deriv if the understat is will or reckless
crimin fraud titl 26 usc 72062
aid or assist in the prepar of a fals return
section 72062 make it a crime to aid or assist in the prepar of a fals return under
thi section a person is guilti of a feloni and mai be subject to a fine of up to 100000 or
500000 in the case of a corpor andor imprison of up to three year
thi feloni is without regard to the knowledg or consent of the person author or
requir to present the return affidavit claim or other document
exampl
rudolf desouza presid and owner of de fens contractor rd intern wa
indict on 86 count of conspiraci convers of govern properti monei launder
file fals incom tax return and submit fals claim and fals statement the
indict is the result of a threeandhalfyear investig by the naval investig
servic and the crimin investig divis of the ir
accord to the indict desouza conspir to inflat the expens of rdi and hi
own incom in an effort to imped the ir as part of the conspiraci he allegedli file
fals corpor incom tax return for rdi that claim deduct for salari that were
never paid the indict sai that rdi us an accrual method of account and
deduct as a busi expens salari that accru to desouza dure a fiveyear period
the contractor claim 490000 in such deduct the accru salari not paid were
enter on rdi book as loan from an offic
in addit the indict alleg that rdi employe purchas comput equip from
a vendor and then leas it at desouza dire ction to bk trade at an inflat price
consequ rdi bill the govern for the cost of the fictiti leas and did not give
the comput to the govern even though it had been reimburs for them moreov
the indict accus desouza of claim thousand of dollar worth of person expens
as busi expens specif he is alleg to have charg the govern for trip to
disneyland disnei world and canada
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11409
the monei launder charg involv alleg that desouza us sever bank account
to conduct approxim 900000 in financi transact design to hide corpor
asset from the bankruptci court specif desouza is accus of have caus
numer transfer of monei from rdi acco unt to those of gm technolog these
transfer had the effect of reduc the balanc of fund in rdi account further desouza
did not disclos to the bankruptci court the exist of gm technolog hi famili
control interest or the monei transfer fr om rdi the indict also alleg that
desouza transfer monei from rdi to anoth familyown compani while the
bankruptci petit wa pend
