2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/TAX FRAUD/Defenses for Tax Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Tax Fraud


:


Defenses for Tax Fraud 
 
No Deficiency 
To prove innocence of tax fraud matters, the defendant can establish that there is no 
deficiency. If there is no deficiency, there is no tax liability.  
Tax Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1410                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Lack of Willfulness 
A lack of willfulness reduces the defendant’s culpability for fraud. 
 
Avoidance Not Evasion 
In contrast to tax fraud, which refers to illegal methods of tax reduction, tax avoidance refers 
to a legal means of lowering one’s tax bill through legitimate deductions, credits, and 
shelters. Thus, establishing that the taxpayer was engaging in tax avoidance and not evasion 
provides a defense to tax fraud.  
 
Objectively Reasonable Position 
A defendant might also claim that he took an “objectively reasonable” position with respect 
to the tax return.  
 
Claim of Right Doctrine 
In the United States, a taxpayer must recognize income if he receives the income, even if he 
does not have a fixed right to the income. Thus, a taxpayer may seek to evade paying their 
income tax by claiming that he does not have an unrestricted right to the money at issue.  
 
Other Defenses 
Mental Illness 
This defense is applicable in regard to the time the return was prepared. 
 
Incompetent Bookkeeper 
[Josey v. Commissioner, TC Memo 1956-153.] In one case a bookkeeper “filed” the tax return 
by putting it in a file cabinet rather than sending it to the Internal Revenue Service. 
 
Ignorance of the Law 
[Rutana v. Commissioner, TC Memo 1986-336.] A court has held that consideration must be 
given to the intelligence and expertise of the taxpayer. 
 
Innocent Spouse 
Innocent spouse relief permits a spouse to avoid tax liability. Under this doctrine, a spouse 
may be excused from tax liability for tax or tax penalties if a joint tax return was filed and the  
spouse can establish the following elements:  
• The underpayment of tax is due to unreported income or disallowed deductions that are 
attributable to the other spouse  
Financial Transactions  Tax Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1411 
• The spouse “did not know and did not have reason to know” of the facts surrounding 
the underpayment of tax.  
 
Additionally, innocent spouses may obtain relief for “erroneous” income items.  
 
Reliance on an Attorney or Accountant 
One can assert a defense of reliance on an attorney or accountant if all of the following 
conditions are met: 
• The reliance is specific. 
• The expert is qualified, which is determined by a facts and circumstances test. 
• Full disclosure to the expert is required. 
 
Inappropriate Defenses 
Some defenses are inappropriate. They include those discussed below. 
 
Amended or Delinquent Return 
A taxpayer will receive no mitigation of penalties for filing an amended or delinquent return. 
[Badaracco v. Commissioner, 464 U.S. 386 (1984).] 
 
Statute of Limitations 
The three-year Statute of Limitations does not apply to tax fraud. [U.S.C., § 6501(c).] 
 
Death of Taxpayer 
Fraud penalties survive the death of the taxpayer. [Helvering v. Mitchell, 303 U.S. 391 (1938); 
Rev. Rule 73 -293, 1973-2 C.B. 413.] 
 
Bankruptcy
Taxes owed as a result of filing fraudulent federal income tax returns are not dischargeable in 
bankruptcy. [11, U.S.C., Sec. 523(a)(1)(c). In Re: Harris, 59 BR 545 (BC-DC Va. 1986); Rev. 
Rule 87-99, 1987-2 C.B. 291.] 
 
 



:


defens for tax fraud
no defici
to prove innoc of tax fraud matter the defend can establish that there is no
defici if there is no defici there is no tax liabil
tax fraud financi transact
11410 2011 fraud examin manual
lack of will
a lack of will reduc the defend culpabl for fraud
avoid not evas
in contrast to tax fraud which refer to illeg method of tax reduct tax avoid refer
to a legal mean of lower on tax bill through legitim deduct credit and
shelter thu establish that the taxpay wa engag in tax avoid and not evas
provid a defens to tax fraud
object reason posit
a defend might also claim that he took an object reason posit with respect
to the tax return
claim of right doctrin
in the unit state a taxpay must recogn incom if he receiv the incom even if he
doe not have a fix right to the incom thu a taxpay mai seek to evad pai their
incom tax by claim that he doe not have an unrestrict right to the monei at issu
other defens
mental ill
thi defens is applic in regard to the time the return wa prepar
incompet bookkeep
josei v commission tc memo 1956153 in on case a bookkeep file the tax return
by put it in a file cabinet rather than send it to the intern revenu servic
ignor of the law
rutana v commission tc memo 1986336 a court ha held that consider must be
given to the intellig and expertis of the taxpay
innoc spous
innoc spous relief permit a spous to avoid tax liabil under thi doctrin a spous
mai be excus from tax liabil for tax or tax penalti if a joint tax return wa file and the
spous can establish the follow element
the underpay of tax is due to unreport incom or disallow deduct that ar
attribut to the other spous
financi transact tax fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11411
the spous did not know and did not have reason to know of the fact surround
the underpay of tax
addition innoc spous mai obtain relief for erron incom item
relianc on an attornei or account
on can assert a defens of relianc on an attornei or account if all of the follow
condit ar met
the relianc is specif
the expert is qualifi which is determin by a fact and circumst test
full disclosur to the expert is requir
inappropri defens
some defens ar inappropri thei includ those discuss below
amend or delinqu return
a taxpay will receiv no mitig of penalti for file an amend or delinqu return
badaracco v commission 464 us 386 1984
statut of limit
the threeyear statut of limit doe not appli to tax fraud usc 6501c
death of taxpay
fraud penalti surviv the death of the taxpay helver v mitchel 303 us 391 1938
rev rule 73 293 19732 cb 413
bankruptci
tax ow as a result of file fraudul feder incom tax return ar not discharg in
bankruptci 11 usc sec 523a1c in re harri 59 br 545 bcdc va 1986 rev
rule 8799 19872 cb 291
