2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Skimming During Nonbusiness Hours


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Skimming During Nonbusiness Hours 
Another way to skim unrecorded sales is to conduct sales during nonbusiness hours. For 
instance, some employees will open stores on weekends or after hours without the 
knowledge of the owners. They can pocket the proceeds of all sales made during these times 
because the owners have no idea that their stores are even open for business.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a retail facility went to work two hours early every day, opening his store at 
8:00 a.m. instead of 10:00 a.m., and pocketed all the sales made during these two hours. 
He rang up sales on the register as if it was business as usual, but then removed the register 
tape and all the cash he had accumulated. The manager then started from scratch at 10:00 
as if the store was just opening. The tape was destroyed so there was no record of the before-
 hours revenue. 
 
To this point skimming has been discussed in the context of cash register transactions, but 
skimming does not have to occur at a register. Some of the most costly skimming schemes 
are perpetrated by employees who work at remote locations or without close supervision. 
This can include on-site sales persons who do not deal with registers, independent salesmen 
who operate off-site, and employees who work at branches or satellite offices. These 
employees have a high level of autonomy in their jobs, which often translates into poor 
supervision and, in turn, to fraud.  
 



:


skim dure nonbusi hour
anoth wai to skim unrecord sale is to conduct sale dure nonbusi hour for
instanc some employe will open store on weekend or after hour without the
knowledg of the owner thei can pocket the proce of all sale made dure these time
becaus the owner have no idea that their store ar even open for busi
exampl
a manag of a retail facil went to work two hour earli everi dai open hi store at
800 am instead of 1000 am and pocket all the sale made dure these two hour
he rang up sale on the regist as if it wa busi as usual but then remov the regist
tape and all the cash he had accumul the manag then start from scratch at 1000
as if the store wa just open the tape wa destroi so there wa no record of the befor
hour revenu
to thi point skim ha been discuss in the context of cash regist transact but
skim doe not have to occur at a regist some of the most costli skim scheme
ar perpetr by employe who work at remot locat or without close supervis
thi can includ onsit sale person who do not deal with regist independ salesmen
who oper offsit and employe who work at branch or satellit offic these
employe have a high level of autonomi in their job which often translat into poor
supervis and in turn to fraud
