2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Skimming of Off-Site Sales


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Skimming of Off-Site Sales 
Several industries rely on remote salespersons to generate revenue. The fact that these 
employees are largely unsupervised puts them in a good position to skim revenues. For 
example, consider the apartment rental industry, where apartment managers handle the 
day-to-day operations without much oversight. A common scheme is for an on-site employee to 
identify the tenants who pay in currency and remove them from the books. This causes a 
particular apartment to appear as vacant on the records when, in fact, it is occupied. The 
manager can skim the rental payments from the “vacant” unit, and the revenue will never be 
missed. As long as no one physically checks the apartment, the perpetrator can continue 
skimming indefinitely.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.406                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another rental-skimming scheme occurs when apartments are rented out but no lease is 
signed. On the books, the apartment will still a ppear to be vacant, even though there are 
tenants on the premises. The perpetrator can skim the rental payments from these tenants 
without fear that they will show up as past due in the company records. Sometimes the 
employees in these schemes work in conjunction with the renters and give a “special rate” to 
these people. In return, the renter’s payments are made directly to the employee and any 
complaints or maintenance requests are directed only to that employee so the tenant’s 
presence in the apartment remains hidden.  
 
Instead of skimming rent, some property managers focus on less predictable forms of 
revenue like application fees and late fees. Ownership may know when rent is due and how 
many apartments are occupied, but often there is no control in place to track the number of 
people who fill out rental applications or how many tenants pay their rent a day or two late. 
Property managers can make thousands of dollars by skimming these “nickel and dime” 
payments.  
 
Off-site skimming is by no means limited to the apartment rental industry. The schemes 
described above can easily translate into any arena where those who generate or collect 
revenues operate in an independent fashion. A prime example is the insurance agent who 
sells policies to customers, then neglects to file the policies with the carrier. Most customers 
do not want to file claims on a policy, especially early in the term, for fear that their 
premiums will rise. Knowing this, the agent k eeps all documentation on the policies instead 
of turning it over to the carrier. The agent is able to skim the customer’s payments because 
the carrier does not know the policy exists. The customer continues to make his payments, 
thinking that he is insured, when in fact the policy is a ruse.  
 



:


skim of offsit sale
sever industri reli on remot salesperson to gener revenu the fact that these
employe ar larg unsupervis put them in a good posit to skim revenu for
exampl consid the apart rental industri where apart manag handl the
daytodai oper without much oversight a common scheme is for an onsit employe to
identifi the tenant who pai in currenc and remov them from the book thi caus a
particular apart to appear as vacant on the record when in fact it is occupi the
manag can skim the rental payment from the vacant unit and the revenu will never be
miss as long as no on physic check the apart the perpetr can continu
skim indefinit
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1406 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth rentalskim scheme occur when apart ar rent out but no leas is
sign on the book the apart will still a ppear to be vacant even though there ar
tenant on the premis the perpetr can skim the rental payment from these tenant
without fear that thei will show up as past due in the compani record sometim the
employe in these scheme work in conjunct with the renter and give a special rate to
these peopl in return the renter payment ar made directli to the employe and ani
complaint or mainten request ar direct onli to that employe so the tenant
presenc in the apart remain hidden
instead of skim rent some properti manag focu on less predict form of
revenu like applic fee and late fee ownership mai know when rent is due and how
mani apart ar occupi but often there is no control in place to track the number of
peopl who fill out rental applic or how mani tenant pai their rent a dai or two late
properti manag can make thousand of dollar by skim these nickel and dime
payment
offsit skim is by no mean limit to the apart rental industri the scheme
describ abov can easili translat into ani arena where those who gener or collect
revenu oper in an independ fashion a prime exampl is the insur agent who
sell polici to custom then neglect to file the polici with the carrier most custom
do not want to file claim on a polici especi earli in the term for fear that their
premium will rise know thi the agent k eep all document on the polici instead
of turn it over to the carrier the agent is abl to skim the custom payment becaus
the carrier doe not know the polici exist the custom continu to make hi payment
think that he is insur when in fact the polici is a ruse
