2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS 
 
Introduction 
Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, and auditors often are called upon to provide 
testimony in criminal and civil prosecutions where their services can be used to support 
investigations of matters such as financial frauds, embezzlements, misapplication of funds, 
arson for profit, bankruptcy fraud, improper accounting practices, and tax evasion. Fraud 
examiners may also be used as defense witnesses or to support the defendant’s counsel on 
matters that involve accounting or audit issues. 
 
Experts can serve one of two roles in the trial process: testifying expert or consulting expert. 
Testifying expert witnesses give opinion testimony when specialized knowledge is needed to help 
the jury understand evidence or determine a fact in issue. Conversely, consulting experts typically 
do not testify at trial. Instead, they are hired to provide technical assistance to the attorney in 
preparing the case. Generally, both testifying and consulting experts play an ongoing part with 
the litigation process.  
 
Although experts serve one of two roles, they can perform various functions throughout the 
litigation process. Lawyers often count on testifying experts to help crystallize the judge or 
jury’s understanding of the case. In his book, Effective Expert Witnessing, author Jack V. Matson 
lists the four main functions of all expert testimony and offers advice on fulfilling each 
assigned duty: 
• Establish the facts. You must first develop a strategy to collect and examine the 
documentation in the case. The discovery process, which is a mechanism for full 
disclosure of all knowledge pertinent to the case, usually yields a vast amount of paper, 
which the expert then must sift through to make a preliminary classification of relevance. 
• Interpret the facts. Tie together cause and effect relationships with the data and the facts for 
the technical basis of your case. Do not be fooled by correlation that seemingly links cause 
and effect but holds no theoretical justification. 
• Comment on the opposing expert’s facts and opinions. Develop a good understanding of the 
opposing experts by reviewing their educational background and experience. Read their 
publications. Probe for weaknesses that your side might exploit. Oftentimes trials become 
a battle of the experts. Prepare for the battle with as much intelligence as you can muster. 
Take apart the opposition’s expert report, which represents the other side’s best case, 
piece by piece. Your attorney needs to know the most intimate details about the facts and 
opinions contained in that report. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.802  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Define the professional standards in the particular area of your opponent’s expertise. One of the most 
critically important ways an expert is used in trial is to define the “standard of care” 
exercised by fellow professionals in the field. Standard of care has been traditionally 
defined on the basis of judgment normally exercised by professionals in good standing. 
Additionally, the professional must be informed or aware of current practices and 
promulgation. Obsolete practices are now considered by the court to be negligent 
practices. Thus, professionals must exercise reasonable, informed judgment in carrying out 
their duties. You, as the expert, will be called upon to define the professional standard and 
to measure that against the standard of care exercised by the professional(s) on the other 
side. 
 
If called by the prosecution, examiners might testify to their findings, and if called by the 
defense, they might testify regarding opinions expressed by the prosecution’s expert — to 
create doubt in the jury’s mind about the credibility or weight to be given to that expert. 
 
Alternatively, an examiner might be called upon to give an opinion different from that reached 
by an equally credible expert on the other side. This might be due to different interpretations 
of the facts of the case. In some instances, given equally plausible alternatives, the case might 
be decided on whichever side has the most credible expert witness. 
 
Additionally, effective expert witnesses frequently share certain characteristics. Credibility is 
one such feature. To become a “credible” expert witness, one must be a member in good 
standing of the profession and usually be recognized as an authority in that profession or 
some specialized aspect of practice within it. 
 
Similarly, an expert witness in the area of accounting must have a thorough knowledge not 
only of generally accepted accounting principles, but also of current promulgations. The 
expert’s expertise often might involve special knowledge of a specific industry. In this case, 
the expert should be aware of recent developments and any important issues within that area. 
 
The expert also must be analytical and be able to work with incomplete data. The expert, 
however, might not always be able to recognize when data is incomplete. As a result, the 
expert might make assumptions that will then be open for interpretation or attack. If all data 
have not been made available, then the opposing counsel might be able to offer alternate 
scenarios that are more plausible under the circumstances, thus discrediting the expert. 
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.803 
Pre-trial Preparation 
Pre-trial preparation remains key to becoming a successful expert witness, and success often 
depends on full inquiry and thorough investigation. Following the initial complaint and 
answer, the discovery process usually begins with one side giving the other a set of written 
questions, called interrogatories. An expert’s assistance may begin by composing the questions 
or by providing the replies, depending on your side of engagement. Both sides then submit 
requests to the other for production of records pertinent to the case. A financial expert is 
often expected to educate a lawyer on the types of documents typically available. Most 
everything — from a single deposit slip to continuous ATM videotapes to voluminous 
accounting ledgers — is subject to discovery. 
 
Many times financial crime experts on the prosecutor’s side must scale a mountain of 
documents or scroll through a heap of computer files to find the core facts that show criminal 
intent or behavior. The defense may bury the other side in paper or electronic documents to 
hide or trivialize vital documentation. Because an efficient search saves time and money, 
successful experts develop an early strategy and tick off a detailed checklist to achieve their 
goals within a specific time frame. 
 
When testifying as an expert, it often is useful to have a list of all other witnesses, including 
those for the other side. This is important so that the expert is not surprised by the existence 
of other experts or reports. One can then determine if it is necessary to be present for the 
testimony of those witnesses and can obtain the necessary court approval. If another expert 
will be present, then it becomes incumbent upon the expert witness to examine the alternate 
reports and to assess whether or not reasonable points are brought up by the other side that 
might affect the credibility of the expert’s report. 
 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
When retained, experts must quickly determine if any conflicts of interest exist — or even 
appear to exist — in a particular case because a conflict might preclude participation. A conflict 
of interest exists when an expert’s ability to objectively evaluate and present an issue for a 
client will be impaired by any current, prior, or future relationship with parties to the litigation. 
 
There are several actions an expert can take to determine if any conflicts of interest exist. 
Before engagement, ask for the names of all parties involved. Review the names with your 
associates as well, requesting full disclosure of any connections, however remote. Prior or 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.804  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ongoing relationships may suggest to others that the expert could not provide undivided 
loyalty to the cause and your client.  
 
Penalties for consulting or acting as an expert in a conflict of interest include expert 
disqualification, attorney disqualification, and inadmissibility of expert testimony. 
 
 
Preparing a Report 
Careful consideration should be given to the preparation of an expert report, which 
documents your findings and opinions for both sides. It puts your reputation on the line. A 
well-written report that lays out a strong case might even prompt an early settlement. 
However, it also lets the opposition see the strengths and weaknesses of your case and better 
prepares them for your deposition and trial testimony.  
 
Keep the following six tips in mind when preparing an expert report: 
• Be brief 
• Avoid ambiguity or inexact language 
• Avoid generalizations; be specific 
• Add charts or graphs where appropriate 
• Reference your work 
• Meticulously check the report for accuracy and neatness 
 
An important problem in the preparation of reports and accounting summaries arises from 
the delegation of tasks to subordinates. If the person giving evidence has not had direct 
knowledge or has not examined the specific documents or prepared the summaries, the expert 
might be trapped under the hearsay rule. If tasks are delegated, it is important that the review 
process entails comparison of all original work documentation. 
 
It also is important to know the effect of other assumptions on the conclusion or opinion 
reached in the report. It often is possible to trap an expert into giving alternate opinions based 
upon assumptions that had not been considered. Generally, working papers and schedules 
supporting the report should not show contradictory conclusions as they may be produced in 
court. This is not to advocate that working papers should be deleted or amended subsequent 
to preparation; rather, it is a caution that these papers should be prepared with the precept 
that they could ultimately be submitted to the court. Thus, the work papers should be 
appropriately prepared.  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.805 
Once they accept a case, many experts immediately start assembling a narrative version of the 
events. This detailed summary of the facts of the case serves as the raw material for rendering 
an official opinion. It is important that the text be written with care and professionalism — as 
the discussion below outlines, the text may (and probably will) have to be produced during 
discovery. Additionally, a well-written narrative helps the attorney in preparing and executing 
the case at trial. 
 
What to Include in an Expert Witness Report  
The requirements for an expert report differ depending on whether a case is pending in 
federal or state court. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(a)(2), which applies to civil cases in 
federal court, requires expert witnesses to prepare reports and provide them to the opposing 
parties, although this requirement may be waived if directed by the court or agreed to by the 
principle parties involved. The rule applies to experts who have been retained specifically for a 
given case, and it includes employees of a party if part of the employees’ duties involves giving 
expert testimony. A written report, often called a Rule 26 report, must be produced for each 
expert witness.  
 
Conversely, some state courts do not require written expert reports but may require another 
form of mandatory disclosures. Unfortunately, the requirements of all fifty states are beyond 
the scope of this manual. Therefore, experts should check with counsel prior to issuing their 
written report to make sure that the report will comply with any applicable standards or 
requirements under state law. 
 
Consult with Counsel 
Generally, experts should coordinate with counsel to ensure that their reports comply with all 
applicable legal standards. Failure to comply could result in a disposition of a claim by 
summary judgment or an order precluding an expert from testifying. 
 
Generally, Include Only What Is Necessary 
If a written report is requested, include only what is necessary. Avoid gratuitous and 
unimportant comments. At a minimum, an expert witness report should do the following: 
• Identify the reason for the report and provide the matter to be explored by the report 
• Provide the expert witness’s observations and opinions, including the basis, rationale, data, 
or other information used to reach the opinions 
• List any exhibits used as a summary of or in support of the provided opinions, including 
all charts or graphs 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.806  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• State any conclusions the witness may have reached based on the observations and 
information 
• Provide all sources, including individuals, articles, sources, documents, and books that the 
expert consulted 
• Cite specific tests that support the expert’s conclusion and list the standards or test 
methods used by the expert 
 
Rule 26 Reports and Disclosure Requirements Under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedures 
As noted above, expert reports in all civil actions in federal court must comply with Rule 26 of 
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 26 states that testifying experts must prepare a 
written report and make certain disclosures about their opinions and supporting grounds. 
Specifically, the expert report, which must be prepared and signed by the expert witness, must 
include the following: 
• A complete statement of all expert opinions to be expressed and the basis and reasons for 
such opinions 
• The data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinion 
• Any exhibits to be used as support for or as a summary of the opinions 
• The qualifications of the expert witness 
• All publications authored by the expert in the preceding 10 years 
• A list of all other cases in which the expert has testified as an expert at trial or at 
deposition within the preceding four years 
• The expert’s compensation for his review and testimony 
 
The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure also impose time limits concerning Rule 26 Reports. The 
rules require that the identity and report of the expert must be disclosed at least 90 days before 
trial. But the disclosure of an expert whose testimony is intended solely to contradict or rebut 
another witness’s testimony must be disclosed within 30 days after the other witness’ 
disclosure. Additionally, an expert must supplement the written report or deposition 
testimony at least 30 days before trial if he becomes aware that previous disclosures might 
have been materially incomplete or incorrect. 
 
If a court finds that an expert report fails to satisfy the Rule 26 requirements, it may strike the 
expert designation and prohibit the expert from testifying. A sample format for an expert 
report is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.807 
Note that under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the expert witness must turn over 
anything he used in forming his opinion. Thus, if an expert uses privileged or confidential 
documents, those documents must be given to the opposing party. 
 
Moreover, draft reports are also discoverable. Therefore, experts should never destroy drafts, 
notes, recordings, or any other form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion. Any 
action to do so may result in permanent loss of the expert’s credibility. In fact, the best 
practice to prevent discovery of draft reports is not to create draft reports in the first place. 
 
These mandatory disclosure requirements remain controversial. Attorneys and judges cannot 
agree on whether the requirements add unnecessary expense or whether they promote 
uniformity and fairness. At least one of those goals, uniformity, has not been realized. Rule 26 
provides that the disclosure requirements are mandatory unless a particular district court 
provides otherwise by order or local rule. Several district courts have elected not to adopt Rule 
26 and have written their own local rules in its place. Accordingly, instead of providing a 
uniform system of disclosing information, the amendments have led to a system of different 
rules for different districts. 
 
Disclosure Requirements Under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 
Lawyers and expert witnesses must also mind the rules regarding expert disclosures in criminal 
cases, which are different from those required in criminal cases. In criminal cases, pretrial 
expert disclosure is only triggered if the defendant requests it from the government. When this 
happens, the government must produce a written summary of any testimony that it intends to 
use during its case-in-chief at trial. The summary must describe the witness’s opinions, the 
bases and reasons for those opinions, and the witness’s qualifications. If the government 
complies and requests reciprocal disclosure, the defendant must also provide a summary of 
any expert testimony he intends to use at trial.  
 
Expert Witness Discovery 
Concerning expert witnesses, discovery is the process by which the opposing side finds out an 
expert’s opinions and underlying rationales. Caution is the by-word for expert witnesses at 
every step of the legal process.  
 
In general, everything that a expert witness creates or uses is discoverable. According to FRCP 
26, which applies to civil cases in federal court, everything the expert receives, reviews, relies, 
produces, and says about the case after being hired is subject to discovery by opposing 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.808  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel. That means everything: narrative versions of the case, comments to the press or law 
enforcement, hypothetical reconstructions, draft reports, and even notes can be demanded 
and used by the opposing party. A shrewd attorney can use an expert’s notebook — which 
contains “dry runs” at an opinion and other purely deliberative information — to call the 
witness’s testimony into question. The only exception, as discussed below, is when the expert 
is hired by the attorney purely on a consulting basis. 
 
Because all “data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinions” is 
admissible in federal court, experts should never destroy drafts, notes, recordings, or any other 
form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion (Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, 
Rule 26(a)). 
 
In legalese, an expert witness has no privilege. The principle of privilege exists to protect certain 
core societal relationships (attorney-client, husband-wife), but the expert witness’s relationship 
with clients is not among those protected. If the expert’s opinions will be presented in court, 
everything related to the expert’s opinion is discoverable.  
 
In fact, anything an expert carries into a deposition — sworn testimony given by a party or 
witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the parties before trial and outside of court — 
is subject to discovery. Attorneys have been known to request a search of someone’s attaché 
case to get at important materials. This sharp edge of discovery is why experts insist on being 
deposed away from their own workplace; if they did not, their entire files would be subject to 
discovery.  
 
The Consulting Expert Exception 
Although everything a expert witness receives, reviews, relies, produces, and says is generally 
discoverable, there is an exception of course: The rules of discovery generally protect 
communications between a consulting expert, the attorney, and the party from disclosure to 
adversaries.  
 
Specifically, the work of a consulting expert is generally not discoverable because it typically 
falls under the protection of the work product doctrine. To review, the work product doctrine 
prevents compelled disclosure of documents and tangible things prepared in anticipation of 
litigation. And because its protection extends to information prepared by or for a party or the 
party’s representative, including consultants, the work of a consulting expert is generally not 
discoverable. But otherwise protected materials may become discoverable through waiver, and 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.809 
the general test for waiver is whether the materials at issue have been disclosed in a manner 
inconsistent with keeping it from an adversary. 
 
The distinction between the protection afforded to consulting and testifying experts is 
something like this: when acting as “witnesses,” experts are bringing official information to 
the court and thus must disclose any contact with the case; when experts act as “consultants” 
or “associates” for attorneys or law enforcement, they are only assisting the attorney and do 
not have to disclose their involvement in the case. 
 
There is, of course, one trap for the unwary: Protection of work product performed by a 
consulting expert may be lost when a testifying expert reviews the work of a consulting expert. 
The rule is that if an expert will testify at trial, everything he does regarding the case must be 
turned over to the other side. If an expert works only as a consultant to the attorney, then his 
work product is not discoverable. But if a testifying  expert reviews the work of a consulting  
expert, then the work of the consultant expert will be discoverable. Just remember this: If you 
are hired to testify at trial, anything you used to form your opinion will be subject to review by 
the opposing party. This includes notes from other experts, documents received from the 
plaintiff or defendant, and any documents or notes from the attorney. Be sure to consult with 
the attorney before you review anything. If a document was given to you by someone other 
than the attorney, ask before you read it. Otherwise, you may inadvertently destroy the 
confidentiality or privilege of the material. 
 
Keeping Good Files 
The best way to protect the confidentiality of information is to keep good files. Dan Poynter 
reports that experts routinely “reduce their files to useful reports only” once they have been 
officially engaged as a witness for trial. No one is recommending that files be sanitized, 
Poynter adds, just updated. The difference may be subject to abuse, but it is simple: Any 
materials that serve as the basis for an expert’s opinion must be in the file. Notes, documents, 
or tests that serve as background or that represent unfruitful lines of investigation do not have 
to be included and probably should not be. The attorney trying the case doesn’t want an 
expert having to answer about dead ends or exploratory jaunts; a shrewd cross-examiner can 
turn a hastily scribbled hypothetical into just enough “reasonable doubt” to avert a conviction. 
So, in the best case scenario, an expert presents to the court an opinion and its basis — nothing 
more, nothing less.  
                                                 
7 Poynter, Dan.  The Expert Witness Handbook.  Santa Barbara: Para Publishing, 1997: p. 82. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.810  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Proposed Changes to Expert Witness Rules Related to Expert Witness Discovery 
Recently, the Judicial Conference of the United States’ Advisory Committee on Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedures proposed significant amendments to Rule 26. If adopted, the amendments 
would significantly change the discoverability of the data or information considered by a 
testifying expert. This section examines the proposals.  
 
Although almost everything a testifying expert says or writes is subject to discovery by 
opposing counsel under current law, the revisions would prohibit the discovery of draft expert 
reports and limit discovery of attorney-expert communications. More specifically, the 
amendments would, among other things, make the following three changes: 
• Communications between counsel and retained testifying experts would generally be 
protected from disclosure or discovery. This amendment would offer work product 
protections similar to those already available to consulting experts.  
• Draft reports and disclosures required by Rule 26(a)(2) of any testifying expert would no 
longer be discoverable.  
• Rule 26 reports produced by a testifying expert would only need to include the “facts or 
data considered” by the expert. Currently, Rule 26(a)(2) reads “data or other information 
considered,” which courts have interpreted to include everything communicated by 
counsel to the expert. Thus, the amendment emphasizes that experts should only include 
factual information in their reports.  
 
These amendments are expected to be adopted and become effective on Dec. 1, 2010, as 
amended. 
 
 
Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness 
Just what constitutes expert status? Generally, the term expert witness refers to someone 
whose education and professional credentials establish their knowledge of a particular set of 
practices. As with introducing exhibits in trial, counsel must lay a foundation for the expert’s 
testimony. This means showing that by formal education, advanced study, or experience, the 
witness is sufficiently knowledgeable on the subject at hand. That is, a witness must be 
qualified to testify as an expert. The foundation may be established during the pre-trial stage 
or during direct examination.  
 
Unfortunately, it is becoming increasingly difficult to testify in federal courts as an expert and 
to understand the standards and rules to qualify as an expert. 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.811 
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the admissibility of expert testimony in 
federal court. Rule 702 provides that a witness qualified as an expert by “knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education” may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise to 
“scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge” if such testimony will “assist the trier of 
fact to understand the evidence or to determine the fact in issue.” 
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 509 U.S. 579 (1993), the Supreme Court stated that 
judges should act as “gatekeepers” and keep out scientific testimony that is not based on the 
methods of science. In a related case titled Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999),  
the Supreme Court stated that the judge’s gate-keeping function applies not just in cases 
dealing with scientific evidence, but in any case involving testimony based on “technical” and 
“other specialized knowledge.”Taken together, these cases mean that expert testimony given 
by Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, or other experts must be judged against the 
standards set forth by the Supreme Court in the Daubert case.  
 
In response to these cases, Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence was modified to 
specifically include the standards set forth by the Supreme Court in Daubert and Kumho Tire. 
Rule 702 now reads: 
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the 
evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) 
the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable 
principles and methods, and (3) the witness has ap plied the principles and methods reliably to the 
facts of the case. 
 
Simply put, Rule 702 provides that the judge must make three determinations before allowing 
an expert to testify before the jury:  
• Is the person qualified as an expert witness?  
• Will the expertise of the witness assist the jury in understanding the evidence or 
determining a fact at issue? In other words, is  the testimony relevant to the facts of the 
case? 
• Is the testimony reliable? 
 
Qualifications 
Before admitting expert testimony, the judge must determine that the expert is a qualified 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.812  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
practitioner. This element addresses whether the individual is qualified to assist the trier of 
fact. For a witness to qualify as an expert, counsel must establish that the witness is sufficiently 
knowledgeable on the subject at hand by showing formal education, skill, or experience. The 
determination of whether a witness is qualified as an expert or whether expert testimony is 
needed is left to the discretion of the trial judge.  
 
The process of evaluating whether an expert is qualified mainly centers on the candidate’s 
formal education and work experience — whether that includes 30 years in law enforcement or 
10 years in a large accounting firm. But there is no particular educational requirement for 
expert testimony; a witness with no formal education may be qualified based on training or 
experience. Some other factors that may be considered include the candidate’s: 
• Awards and honors 
• Licensing or certification 
• Technical training 
• Published books and journal articles 
• Positions in professional associations, societies, and organizations 
 
In addition to being qualified as an expert, the expert’s qualifications must be relevant to the 
particular issue(s) in the case at hand. But the important thing to remember is that a person 
can be qualified as an expert based on either special training or experience. A person does not 
have to be a CFE to testify as an expert on fraud detection techniques if that person has 
sufficient practical experience in those techniques. The CFE designation is important because 
it serves as a recognition of the special skills that those holding the designation have 
demonstrated to become a CFE. 
 
Although designations are important, it is most helpful to have prior experience as an expert 
with litigation or criminal matters. This is primarily because of what is learned during the 
experience of testifying. Further, it often is helpful to have been accepted as an expert in other 
cases thereby easing current acceptance. A danger exists, however, of appearing to be a 
“professional witness.” 
 
The counsel introducing the witness often will read the expert’s qualifications or ask specific 
questions to establish the witness’s credentials. Smart defense lawyers are not likely to 
challenge the credentials of experts, assuming they meet at least minimum standards of 
professional competence. To do so may give these experts an opportunity to fully highlight 
their professional credentials and perhaps make a greater impression on the jury or judge, thus 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.813 
adding more weight to their testimony. Although the expert’s qualifications are not often 
contested, it does happen. Beyond being accepted by both parties, the expert witness most 
importantly must be accepted by the court. 
 
Testimony 
After determining that a witness is a qualified expert, the trial judge must determine that the 
testimony offered by the expert is relevant to the facts of the case and reliable. These two 
questions focus on what opinions the expert will actually testify to in court.  
 
Relevant testimony will assist the jury in understanding the evidence or determining a fact at 
issue. To be relevant, the proposed testimony must be “sufficiently tied to the facts of the case 
that it will aid the jury in resolving a factual dispute.” Specifically, the court must determine 
whether the expert’s opinion has any tenden cy to make the existence of any fact more 
probable than it would be without the evidence. Testimony is not relevant if the jury can make 
its own determination without expert testimony. 
 
To be reliable, the testimony must be based on sufficient facts and data, and it must be the 
product of reliable methodology that has been reliably applied  to the facts of the case. This 
assures that an expert’s opinions are not mere speculation.  
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the Supreme Court set forth the following non-exclusive 
list of factors to assess reliability: 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique can be or has been tested 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and 
publication 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique enjoys general acceptance within the relevant 
scientific community 
• Whether there are standards governing the method used by the expert 
• Whether the expert’s technique has a high error rate 
 
Accordingly, CFEs should be sure to fully cover the rationale for their assumptions and 
determine whether the assumptions are supported by the facts presented during discovery. In 
fact, courts often find that assumptions not supported by evidence render expert opinions 
insufficient, thus causing the judge to exclude the expert’s testimony. For example, in Target 
Market Publishing, Inc. v. ADVO, Inc., a breach of contract case arising from a joint venture to 
produce advertising publications, a well-qualified accountant and business appraiser concluded 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.814  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that, had the defendant performed its contractual obligations, the joint venture would have 
earned $1.4 million in profits. To reach this conclusion, the expert assumed the joint venture 
would have successfully entered 49 marketing zones at the time of the breach. But the joint 
venture had only entered into two marketing zones and was unprofitable in both. The 
appellate court affirmed the exclusion of the expert’s opinion as to the value of a contract 
because the methodology underlying the opinion was based upon subjective belief and 
speculation, including unsupported assumptions.  
 
When preparing an expert report or testimony, examiners should keep in mind the Daubert 
factors set forth above. Examiners should document their conclusions, how they reached 
those conclusions, what evidence they based the conclusions on, and what professional 
techniques or knowledge they used. It would also be a good idea to keep a list of professional 
books or journals that advocate or sanction whatever principles were used in drawing the 
conclusions. 
 
Daubert Challenges 
A Daubert challenge is a motion raised, either before or during trial, to exclude an expert 
witness from presenting evidence. This motion is used to exclude the testimony of an expert 
who lacks sufficient expertise or uses questionable methods. 
 
Basis of Expert Testimony 
Rule 703 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the sources on which experts may base 
their testimony. It provides that experts may rely on facts or data made known to the expert at 
or before the hearing: 
 
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may 
be those perceived by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing. If of a type reasonably 
relied upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject, the 
facts or data need not be admissible in evidence in order for the opinion or inference to be 
admitted.  
 
Therefore, under Rule 703, an expert may base an opinion on:  
• Firsthand observations 
• Facts, data, or opinions presented at trial 
• Facts, data, or opinions conveyed outside of court  
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.815 
In addition, under Rule 703, experts can rely on inadmissible hearsay or other inadmissible 
evidence as long as it is the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field — a 
determination that is left to the discretion of the trial judge. This rule allows an expert to 
employ data usually used by experts in the field, though the data itself may not be admissible. 
An example might be a table of interest rates taken from a Department of Commerce 
publication. Similarly, an accountant serving as an expert witness may rely on private sources 
in forming an opinion if such sources normally are relied upon by accountants.  
 
The majority of states, however, follow the common law rule, which permits a more limited 
basis for expert testimony. Most states require the expert to predicate testimony on firsthand 
perception, or in the alternative, information “admitted in evidence at the hearing” at which 
he is called to testify. 
 
 
Preparing to Testify 
The majority of cases filed will not go to trial. They will be resolved through either a 
settlement agreement or a plea bargain. Therefore, most experts’ experience in testifying 
comes through having their depositions taken.  
 
Depositions of Expert Witnesses 
A deposition is sworn testimony given by a party or witness upon questioning by counsel for 
one of the parties before trial and outside of court. A deposition serves as a powerful 
discovery device that may be used to compel anyone associated with the case to give oral 
testimony under oath. Although you cannot decline to testify, an expert may be allowed to 
specify a convenient time and place.  
 
Sometimes the party requesting the deposition pays the opposing expert’s fee — which consists 
of the time spent giving the deposition at his standard hourly rate or in half-day or full-day 
increments, plus travel time. This usually occurs in federal court. Most state courts require 
each side to pay the expenses of the expert’s they hire. An expert charges his client for the 
time spent preparing for deposition and for testifying. 
 
In addition to the required court reporter, the proceeding may be recorded by a camera or a 
voice recorder. A judge is not present during this question-and-answer session. For skilled 
investigators, deposition provides a golden opportunity to hear the other side’s case aloud. 
The opposition may set ulterior goals as well, including: 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.816  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To learn new information or confirm existing facts 
• To appraise the expert’s ability as a witness 
• To lock the expert into a hard-to-defend position 
• To create a written record for future impeachment 
 
Before testifying at a deposition or at trial, the expert should ensure that required graphic 
displays are ready and available, that all important discussions with the lawyer have been held, 
and that the expert has a complete understanding of the report and other relevant issues. The 
expert should ensure that he has agreement with counsel as to the sequence of evidence and 
the strategy for presenting it. It often is useful to have a “dry run” at the direct testimony, with 
all the questions posed by the counsel to the expert, to avoid surprises during trial. 
 
At pre-testimony meetings, it is appropriate to discuss the qualifications of the witness again 
to ensure that they are current, to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the case, and to 
discuss and agree on what parts of the expert’s reports, if any, are to be entered as exhibits. 
 
Appearance 
The appearance of the expert witness often lends itself to an assessment of the credibility of 
that witness. It is recommended that the witness wear conservative business attire, be well-groomed, 
and neatly dressed.  
 
It is also important that the witness maintain a professional demeanor. In the witness box, the 
witness should maintain a poised, alert appearance, stand firmly, and be ready to take the oath. 
The witness should not smile gratuitously at the judge, jury, or the lawyers. Also, it is 
important that the witness keep control of his hands, to avoid fidgeting. And witness should 
maintain eye contact with the questioner as much as possible; he should not stare off into 
space, at the floor, or at the ceiling. 
 
As the judge will be taking notes, the witness should speak slowly to ensure that the judge 
does not fall behind. The answers should be directed to the questioner. The witness’s voice 
should be strong, clear, and audible. Thus, before answering each question, the witness should 
pause before answering and carefully consider the answer; he should also respond in a slow 
and deliberate manner. 
 
Do's and Don'ts 
There are other considerations in making an expert a credible witness. Some tips are: 
• Exude an alert and confident attitude. 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.817 
• Maintain professional pride and integrity throughout. 
• Tell the truth; be honest and avoid bias. 
• Use simple rather than complex terms, and refrain from using professional jargon. 
• Explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms. 
• Be friendly and polite to all parties present. 
• Be alert.  
• Correct any misstatements as soon as they are detected. 
• Listen carefully and answer the specific questions—do not go off on tangents or volunteer 
more than the question requires. 
• Do not verbally fence with the attorney. 
• Do not try to be humorous or hip. 
• Be calm and deliberate in responding to questions—think before you speak. 
• Plan your testimony in advance and know your material thoroughly.  
• Use graphs, charts, and other visual aids if they help to clarify a point. 
• Do not read from notes if you can avoid it (the opposition lawyer will probably demand to 
see such notes, and the witness will then look like he rehearsed his testimony). 
• Prepare your material completely. If you have documents to introduce, have them 
organized so that you can quickly retrieve them when asked to do so. 
• Do not “hem and haw” or stammer; recover your composure when a tough or complex 
question is posed. 
• Ask for a question to be repeated or clarified if not fully comprehended. 
• If an answer is not known, say so; do not guess. 
• Do not invent and do not inflate. 
• In cross-examination, do not respond too quickly because counsel might wish to object to 
the question. 
• Do not be evasive. 
 
Several other things should also be avoided. These range from drinking five cups of coffee 
immediately prior to testimony or chewing bubble gum while giving evidence, to small 
physical mannerisms that might affect your appearance. These physical mannerisms, which 
might be as simple as rubbing one’s hands together continually, looking down at one’s hands, 
fidgeting on the stand, or jingling coins in a pocket, could become irritating to the judge and 
jury. 
 
Similar to trial proceedings, the opposition commonly drills an expert about his credentials, his 
methodology, and his conclusions pertaining to the case. Unlike in a trial, the expert quite 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.818  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
often answers tersely, giving only a straight “yes” or “no.” For inquiries that require more, you 
should respond directly and precisely and refrain from volunteering any information. It is not 
your duty to educate the other side at deposition. You may ask for a recess or a break if 
needed. 
 
Pour over the written transcription of your deposition afterward to ensure accuracy, 
immediately correcting any omissions or errors, whether made by you or the stenographer. 
Notify your lawyer if your opinion has changed since deposition. If you are present at the 
deposition of the opposing expert, you may be asked to summarize your impressions 
afterward and note any gray areas that call for further lines of inquiry. 
 
 
Direct Examination  
Direct examinations are conducted by the attorney who retained the expert. Because experts 
are hired for their opinions, they are not subject to the usual restrictions about statements of 
judgment. Experts also have other leeway not given to ordinary witnesses. They may rely on 
documents or exchanges that would otherwise be inadmissible as hearsay. This allows them to 
use articles, academic papers, professional texts, and consultations in rendering their opinions 
of the case. These materials are admissible as long as they were used by the expert in 
developing his opinion.  
 
Presenting Expert Testimony 
Expert witnesses present their findings in various ways such as narrative questions, 
hypotheticals, specialized materials, and special exhibits. Experts are commonly asked to 
answer narrative questions, which are all but forbidden to lay witnesses. Narrative questions are 
broad, open-ended questions that allow experts to present their opinions in their own words 
with minimal prompting from the lawyer. Fraud cases, with their divergent paths of activity 
and intrigue, can require complex summarizing in order for the facts to make any sense. The 
average group of jurors has never considered how someone could manipulate store 
inventories to drive up the company’s stock price and then make millions on the phony surge. 
The expert witness in cases like this often will begin testimony by recounting the narrative 
background of a case, the tests and experiments that were performed during the investigation, 
and a summary of the findings based on his professional expertise.  
 
Expert witnesses also are allowed to demonstrate their findings by using hypotheticals: fictional 
situations, analogous to the act in question, which clarify and highlight particular aspects of 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.819 
the dispute. But to be effective, hypotheticals must be constructed exquisitely. Appeals courts 
have been adamant that the facts of the case being tried have to be reflected directly in the 
hypothetical situation; there must be no exaggeration or obscuring in the presentation.  
 
Moreover, experts sometimes use specialized ma terials in reaching and communicating their 
opinions. Professional publications and sources of information that normally are used in the 
course of business may be produced as part of the trial. Federal rules require only that the 
source be “generally used and relied on” by people in that field.  
 
Finally, experts may use special exhibits to demonstrate facts about the case or some aspect of 
their opinion. These exhibits may include charts, diagrams, annotated documents, or photos. 
If the exhibit is offered to prove a fact, it must satisfy the rules applicable to any other piece of 
evidence in the case. In demonstrating a professional opinion, the role of the exhibit must be 
clear and its applicability to the present case justified, if necessary.  
 
Direct Testimony Considerations 
The purpose of direct examination is to enable counsel for the side you represent to draw out 
the evidence to prove the case. Most likely, this will only be a reiteration of what previously 
has been discussed with your counsel outside the courtroom. It is still very important, 
however, to refresh your memory beforehand by reference to anything you may have read, 
written, or given in evidence on the case. 
 
Direct examination is the most organized aspect of the trial; it is the stage in which the 
expert’s credibility must be established with the judge or jury. According to the concept of the 
primary memory, people remember best what they hear first and last. This often is a useful 
idea to employ in giving or structuring evidence. Another noteworthy point is that the jurors 
often have limited attention spans in a long trial; thus, it is often useful to use a 
“grab/give/conclude” method of presenting evidence. 
 
To a witness, the interpretation of questions and the ability to listen are crucial skills. Even 
though the witness might already have gone through a mock direct examination, it is critical 
that each question be carefully evaluated again — the witness should reflect upon the questions 
asked and not anticipate them (they might have been changed, anyway, since the time of 
rehearsal). 
 
The answers to all questions should be clear and concise, and, where complex terms are used, 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.820  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
they should be clarified. Similarly, explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms and avoid 
professional jargon because the fact finders might not be familiar with esoteric or technical 
terminology. 
 
Use of notes should be limited as much as possible to maintain eye contact. 
 
Schedules, if any, should be described accurately and succinctly in easily understood terms. 
Schedules are, by their nature, concise documents and should be described in that manner.  
 
If opinions are given, they should be stated with conviction. 
 
Certain standards for Certified Fraud Examiners are found in the Code of Professional Ethics 
(please see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual). 
Specifically, Certified Fraud Examiners are prohibited from expressing opinions as to the guilt 
or innocence of any person or party. This is not to say that the expert witness cannot testify to 
the badges, hallmarks, or characteristics of fraud found in the case. It also does not mean that 
the Certified Fraud Examiner cannot testify that, based on the evidence, he believes the 
accused might have committed the offense. However, the ultimate guilt or innocence of any 
person or party is the sole responsibility of the judge and jury. The Certified Fraud Examiner 
typically will not be permitted to testify to the ultimate fact questions. 
 
 
Cross-Examination 
Cross-examination is truly the highlight of the adversary court system. It is geared to allow 
counsel either to clarify or to make points at the witness’s expense. It generally is the most 
difficult part of the trial process for any witness. Anything can turn up that might refute or 
embarrass the witness. The witness’s credibility is constantly called into question. 
 
The goals of the opposing counsel during cross-examination are threefold. The first goal is to 
diminish the importance of the expert testimony just presented. The second goal is to have 
the expert testify in support of the opposing position by providing a series of assumptions. 
The third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequacies in the expert’s 
opinion, thereby discrediting the opinion, the report, and the witness. 
 
The opposing counsel can attack or question anything that has been said or entered into court. 
This includes notes, working papers, affidavits, will-says, reports, and preliminary trial or 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.821 
discovery transcripts. Often, cross-examination creates an atmosphere of confrontation and 
contradiction.  
 
The witness must not take attacks or attempts to discredit personally. There are many ways to 
discredit an expert witness. Throughout the process, it is important for the witness to maintain 
pride and professional integrity. An adage to remember is that “even mud can be worn well.” 
 
Opposing counsel wants to reduce or limit the impact of the witness’s evidence — it is natural 
to feel a certain amount of apprehension, and this might do a great deal to keep the witness 
alert. The jury often watches the judge, and thus the expert often can take a clue as to the 
tempo and reaction of the jury and the judge to the evidence being presented. Slight changes 
in style and presentation could be made accordingly. 
 
The opposing counsel usually has a plan of cross-examination in mind and an expert witness 
should be able to anticipate this direction to prevent falling into a trap. A danger to this, of 
course, is that the witness will spend as much time planning ahead as answering the questions, 
and might not be giving appropriate attention to the immediate questions. Further, in 
attempting to anticipate a question, the witness might misunderstand what is actually asked. 
 
Generally, it is a rule of thumb that a witness should not volunteer or freely give information.  
 
During the answer, it often might be extremely difficult to avoid getting trapped in various 
assumptions, “what if” scenarios, and generalities presented by counsel during cross-examination. 
If this occurs, or if asked a long or imprecise question, retrench by asking for a 
question to be rephrased in smaller components. 
 
It is critical never to underestimate the expertise of the opposing counsel. Often, opposing 
counsel will be underplaying its understanding of the issues to lull the expert into a sense of 
security. This can lead the expert into a difficult situation. Opposing counsel’s golden rule is to 
cross-examine only if it would benefit the case. In asking questions of the witness, opposing 
counsel generally either will ask short questions in plain words or will ask leading questions. 
Usually counsel knows the answers to the questions. 
   
The opposing counsel generally will evaluate answers and then take a specific approach that 
furthers the argument. Generally, the witness will not be allowed to explain or elaborate on 
the question as that would allow the witness to alter the thrust of a carefully orchestrated 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.822  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
cross-examination. Opposing counsel will continually question or evaluate how the last 
question and answer could be used against the witness. 
 
Furthermore, opposing counsel often will prepare by researching the expert. For example, it is 
likely that counsel will read all earlier testimony and publications of the witness. Opposing 
counsel also might speak to other lawyers as to the witness’s capabilities in court if the lawyers 
have had experience with the witness. If weaknesses are discovered, the questioning probably 
will be directed to that area. 
 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to take psychological control of a witness by: 
• Using physical presence to intimidate 
• Making nonstop eye contact 
• Challenging space of the witness 
• Asking questions at a fast pace to confuse the witness 
• Not allowing the expert to explain or deviate from the exact question 
 
Physical domination often is used by opposing counsel. Opposing counsel will quickly 
discover the response pattern of the expert and might take an aggressive stance to lead the 
expert to the point where he is unsure. 
 
Counsel may employ the following strategic methods to discredit a witness or to diminish the 
importance of a witness’s testimony. These methods could be used alone or in conjunction 
with one another and are not an all-encompassing list. A good counsel in cross-examination 
will quickly discover the witness’s weak areas and employ any possible techniques to achieve 
its goal. 
 
Myopic Vision 
Myopic vision entails getting the expert to admit to a great amount of time being spent in the 
investigation of a matter, then selecting an area to highlight about which the expert is unsure 
or has not done much work. This area might not be central to the issues in the case, but it 
must be relevant to the conclusions reached. Then the opposing counsel will make a large 
issue of it and prove that the expert’s vision is myopic in that the work was limited in extent 
or scope and, as such, substandard. At the same time, the matter of fees could be drawn in to 
show that large sums were expended to have this “obviously incomplete” work done. 
 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.823 
Safety 
This approach involves lulling the expert into a feeling of false security by not attacking him. 
After the expert feels secure, the opposing counsel might find a small hole in the expert’s 
testimony that can be enlarged quickly. This approach often is characterized by being friendly 
and conciliatory, by which the jury is made sympathetic to the cause of the opposing counsel. 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to achieve a certain amount of association with the 
witness that will make the witness want to help the opposing counsel to bring out 
information. Doing so may result in the witness giving information that otherwise would not 
have been given. With this additional information, it might be possible to find a chink or hole 
in the evidence and open it further. 
 
Contradiction 
Opposing counsel might use leading questions to force the witness into a hard or 
contradictory position. Alternately, counsel can establish the credibility in court of a 
potentially contradicting document or quote from other articles written by experts in the field. 
If these documents or articles are in contradiction to the expert, then an admission can be 
obtained from the expert as to that contradiction. If a contradiction exits, the expert might be 
drawn into an argument as to who is the most appropriate or experienced person. Instances 
also occur in which a witness has contradicted himself or his own article written several years 
prior merely because of his lack of memory or confusion due to the attack. 
 
New Information 
Opposing counsel may introduce new information of which the expert might not be aware. 
This normally is done to introduce confusion in the witness’s mind in the hope that the 
witness might contradict himself or develop a series of alternate scenarios given the new 
information to show that the existing report and opinions are no longer of value. 
 
Support Opposing Side’s Theory 
This approach recognizes an expert’s qualifications and evidence. The same information used 
by the expert is then interpreted by opposing counsel in a different fashion to support an 
alternate theory. By getting the expert to agree to the alternate interpretation of the facts and 
the alternate theory, the opposing counsel, in effect, has made the expert a witness for the 
other side. This technique is useful to obtain concessions from the witness that would damage 
his conclusions and, ultimately, his credibility. 
 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.824  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bias 
This method draws the expert’s counsel and the expert together to show possible collusion as 
to the evidence being presented, and hence to demonstrate bias. This can be shown if the 
opposing counsel can determine that the expert’s  counsel had instructed the witness as to 
what to say or by limiting the expert’s scope and thus his conclusions. This approach also can 
focus on the question of whether or not the expert was told by his client what to do and look 
for. With this approach, opposing counsel might attempt to show that the expert overlooked 
important documentation in an effort to assist his client. 
 
Confrontation 
This method involves the use of a confrontation of wills to put the witness into a situation in 
which he might lose emotional control and show anger. Once a witness has exploded, 
credibility normally disappears. 
 
Sounding Board 
This method uses the witness as a sounding board to reacquaint the jury with the favorable 
aspects (to opposing counsel) of the case. This technique often uses the “is it not true?” and 
“would you agree with me?” approach. Constant agreement is useful to browbeat the expert. 
In the eyes of the judge and jury, agreement with various questions raised by the opposing 
counsel also might be assumed to be a general concurrence with the position of the opposing 
counsel. 
 
Fees 
This method attacks the witness on the basis of taking an inordinate amount of time for the 
result given. The attack might indicate a lack of complete work and be correlated to the fee 
charged. This method often is related to “bias” and “myopic vision.” It might be suggested 
that the witness and his opinion are, in fact, biased. This technique often builds to a 
conclusion in which the opposing counsel arrives at the idea that the work was superficial and 
unprofessional, yet a great deal of money was received by the expert for this and other areas 
of service to the client. The inference is that the testimony was purchased or that the expert 
was paid to overlook facts contradictory to the conclusions reached. 
 
Terms of Engagement 
This technique normally is employed by obtaining the original engagement letter and 
examining the terms of engagement. Opposing counsel can then show that the expert 
intended to look only at various items in support of his client and glossed over alternative 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.825 
theories, generally to the detriment of the opposition. As such, the witness could be portrayed 
as partial.  
 
Discrediting the Witness 
Discrediting the witness is based on proving that the expert is unworthy to be a credible 
witness instructor to the court. This often can be accomplished by showing that the expert is 
currently or has previously been grossly biased, prejudiced, or corrupt; been convicted of 
criminal activities; been shown to engage in immoral activities; made inconsistent statements; 
acquired a reputation for a lack of veracity; or exaggerated his qualifications. Discrediting also 
could consist of looking at the quality of the expert’s educational background to reveal any 
other unusual activities that might bias the witness or exclude him from the court as an expert. 
 
Personal Attacks 
Another cross-examination tactic often used by attorneys is to “kill the messenger.” These 
attacks are of a more personal nature and generally include some of the following: 
• The witness is unqualified. 
• The witness displayed unprofessional behavior during the examination (such as asking 
personal or sexual questions during interviews). 
• The witness had a conflict of interest. 
• The witness was harassing (phone calls at home, threatening voice mails, etc.). 
 
Failure to Follow the Standards of the Profession 
Additionally, the attorney may attempt to discredit experts by trying to show that they failed to 
follow the standards, best practices, or professional conduct rules set forth by their profession, 
such as the ACFE for fraud examiners or other professional bodies such as the AICPA, the 
IIA, or state bar associations. 
 
For CFEs, it is extremely important to be familiar with the tools and techniques set forth in 
the Fraud Examiners Manual. There have been cases where enterprising defense attorneys have 
obtained copies of the Manual and quizzed the fraud examiner about whether or not the 
methods set forth in the Manual were followed. Likewise, attorneys will often question CFEs 
about the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics, particularly regarding the prohibition against 
stating an opinion of guilt or innocence (which is discussed below). 
 
It is important to understand that the Fraud Examiners Manual does not set forth standards. 
The Manual provides the CFE with information, suggestions, and methods for conducting a 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.826  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
fraud examination. A CFE is always required to follow the Code of Professional Ethics, but 
he is not required to follow what is set forth in the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
However, if a fraud examiner deviates from the normal investigative methods set forth in the 
Manual, he should have an explanation as to why it was appropriate and explain that the 
Manual is only provided as guidance. 
 
 
Expressing an Opinion on Guilt 
As previously discussed, testifying expert witnesses give opinion testimony, which is based 
upon their specialized knowledge and experience about case issues, but experts may only give 
opinion testimony in areas that will aid the jurors in reaching their verdict. Additionally, 
experts may give opinion testimony on ultimate issues (i.e., the basic conclusions upon which 
the outcome of a case depends), but they cannot offer legal conclusions or educate the jury on 
the principles of law.  
 
Moreover, article five of the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics prohibits opinions regarding 
the guilt or innocence of any person or party:  
 
A fraud examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence or other documentation to 
establish a reasonable basis for any opinion rendered. No opinion shall be expressed regarding the 
guilt or innocence of any person or party.  
 
This rule is a rule of prudence. For example, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to 
refrain from usurping the role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified 
Fraud Examiner for such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
The fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such evidence might 
constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. However, a clear 
line should be drawn between a report that essentially says “Here is the evidence,” and one 
that steps over the line and says “He is the guilty (innocent) person.” Nevertheless, there is a 
fine line between recommending action — forwarding the evidence to a law enforcement 
agency or filing a complaint or lawsuit — and giving an opinion on guilt or innocence. Certified 
Fraud Examiners might make such recommendations because they think the evidence is 
strong enough to support a case. They might even have a conclusion about whether the 
suspect committed a crime. The rule does not prohibit the Certified Fraud Examiner, under 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.827 
the proper circumstances, from accusing the person under investigation. However, the 
ultimate decision of whether a person is “guilty” or “innocent” is for a jury to determine. The 
CFE is free to report the facts and the conclusions that can be drawn from those facts, but the 
decision as to whether or not a person is guilty of a crime is a decision for the judge or jury. 
 
 
Witness Immunity for Experts 
Generally, federal and state courts grant fact witnesses immunity for their testimony at trial. 
There are three commonly cited public policy rationales for granting this immunity. First, the 
immunity rule prevents self-censorship of the witness. Second, without immunity, witnesses 
may be inclined to distort their testimony in fear of a retaliatory suit. Third, the cross-examination 
process ensures truthful and reliable testimony.  
 
Furthermore, courts have extended witness immunity to include adverse expert witnesses and 
court-appointed expert witnesses. This immunity generally applies to trial testimony, 
deposition testimony, and report preparation. Courts grant immunity to adverse and court-appointed 
experts for numerous reasons, including the long-standing common law witness 
immunity doctrine, the prevention of witness self-censorship, and the belief that the judicial 
system adequately ensures truthful and reliable testimony. However, even though immunity is 
the general rule for adverse and court-appointed experts, courts have denied immunity and 
permitted negligence claims where testifying experts breach their professional duty to act 
within the standard of care.  
 
Despite the witness immunity discussed above, recent cases indicate that expert witnesses may 
be liable to their retaining party for their pre-trial work or testimony, ruling that expert 
witnesses should not be immune from liability from their own clients. In fact, a growing 
number of states have allowed parties to sue their own experts for negligent testimony, 
including California, Connecticut, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Missouri, New Jersey, and 
Pennsylvania.  
 
The underlying bases for denying immunity to friendly experts are generally founded on the 
following rationales: (1) the common law grou nds for immunity are narrow; (2) potential 
liability encourages total and honest testimony; (3) experts should be held to the standard of 
their profession; (4) the role of the paid advisor and advocate warrants allowing claims; and (5) 
the judicial system does not adequately ensure truthful and reliable testimony from friendly 
experts.  
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.828  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Expert witnesses should be aware that the witness immunity defense for experts is eroding, 
and as a result, suits alleging that expert witnesses committed fraud or negligence are 
increasing. Moreover, the presence of expert witnesses in the legal system will not decrease in 
the near future. Therefore, it is important that expert witnesses understand the liabilities and 
protections placed upon them.  
 
 
Summary 
In his book Succeeding As an Expert Witness, Harold A. Feder suggests keeping the following in 
mind while you are working on a particular case: 
• Keep an open mind. 
• Do not approach a case with predetermined conclusions as to causation, culpability, fault, 
or damage. 
• Remember that attorneys and clients come to you with facts that might be slanted, either 
accidentally or purposefully. 
• Carefully follow your own well-established investigative steps; develop forms, procedures, 
and processes that will ensure that you do not overlook evidence. 
 
One of the best things you can do is to stay current about new developments in your field. It 
takes a concerted effort to stay on top of changes and advances in any industry, as well as the 
latest forensic investigation methods. To be a successful expert witness in any area of 
accounting, for instance, you must have a thorough knowledge of not only generally accepted 
accounting principles, but also current promulgation. For cases involving credit card fraud, 
you must have a basic understanding of your nation’s electronic banking system. While active 
practice in your field of expertise — in other words, experience — remains your single most 
valuable source of knowledge, other sources abound. 
 
Actions, which maintain and improve your current credentials and make you a better expert 
witness, include: 
• Pursuing continuing education and training opportunities 
• Reading trade journals and publications 
• Joining and participating in professional societies and associations 
• Teaching, lecturing, and holding seminars 
• Attending specialized seminars and workshops 
• Writing for trade journals and publications 
• Taking advanced computer courses 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.829 
You can practice your oral delivery skills, and hence improve your credibility, by actively 
pursuing public speaking engagements and opportunities.  
 
Similarly, to feel more comfortable on the legal stage, you may wish to visit your local 
courtroom to observe another financial expert giving testimony in similar cases. Cable 
television, especially local government shows and the Court-TV channel, also offer a chance 
to see other experts in action in a variety of situations. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.101




:


testifi as an expert wit
introduct
certifi fraud examin account and auditor often ar call upon to provid
testimoni in crimin and civil prosecut where their servic can be us to support
investig of matter such as financi fraud embezzl misappl of fund
arson for profit bankruptci fraud improp account practic and tax evas fraud
examin mai also be us as defens wit or to support the defend counsel on
matter that involv account or audit issu
expert can serv on of two role in the trial process testifi expert or consult expert
testifi expert wit give opinion testimoni when special knowledg is need to help
the juri understand evid or determin a fact in issu convers consult expert typic
do not testifi at trial instead thei ar hire to provid technic assist to the attornei in
prepar the case gener both testifi and consult expert plai an ongo part with
the litig process
although expert serv on of two role thei can perform variou function throughout the
litig process lawyer often count on testifi expert to help crystal the judg or
juri understand of the case in hi book effect expert wit author jack v matson
list the four main function of all expert testimoni and offer advic on fulfil each
assign duti
establish the fact you must first develop a strategi to collect and examin the
document in the case the discoveri process which is a mechan for full
disclosur of all knowledg pertin to the case usual yield a vast amount of paper
which the expert then must sift through to make a preliminari classif of relev
interpret the fact tie togeth caus and effect relationship with the data and the fact for
the technic basi of your case do not be fool by correl that seemingli link caus
and effect but hold no theoret justif
comment on the oppos expert fact and opinion develop a good understand of the
oppos expert by review their educ background and experi read their
public probe for weak that your side might exploit oftentim trial becom
a battl of the expert prepar for the battl with as much intellig as you can muster
take apart the opposit expert report which repres the other side best case
piec by piec your attornei need to know the most intim detail about the fact and
opinion contain in that report
testifi as an expert wit law
2802 2011 fraud examin manual
defin the profession standard in the particular area of your oppon expertis on of the most
critic import wai an expert is us in trial is to defin the standard of care
exercis by fellow profession in the field standard of care ha been tradition
defin on the basi of judgment normal exercis by profession in good stand
addition the profession must be inform or awar of current practic and
promulg obsolet practic ar now consid by the court to be neglig
practic thu profession must exercis reason inform judgment in carri out
their duti you as the expert will be call upon to defin the profession standard and
to measur that against the standard of care exercis by the profession on the other
side
if call by the prosecut examin might testifi to their find and if call by the
defens thei might testifi regard opinion express by the prosecut expert to
creat doubt in the juri mind about the credibl or weight to be given to that expert
altern an examin might be call upon to give an opinion differ from that reach
by an equal credibl expert on the other side thi might be due to differ interpret
of the fact of the case in some instanc given equal plausibl altern the case might
be decid on whichev side ha the most credibl expert wit
addition effect expert wit frequent share certain characterist credibl is
on such featur to becom a credibl expert wit on must be a member in good
stand of the profess and usual be recogn as an author in that profess or
some special aspect of practic within it
similarli an expert wit in the area of account must have a thorough knowledg not
onli of gener accept account principl but also of current promulg the
expert expertis often might involv special knowledg of a specif industri in thi case
the expert should be awar of recent develop and ani import issu within that area
the expert also must be analyt and be abl to work with incomplet data the expert
howev might not alwai be abl to recogn when data is incomplet as a result the
expert might make assumpt that will then be open for interpret or attack if all data
have not been made avail then the oppos counsel might be abl to offer altern
scenario that ar more plausibl under the circumst thu discredit the expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2803
pretrial prepar
pretrial prepar remain kei to becom a success expert wit and success often
depend on full inquiri and thorough investig follow the initi complaint and
answer the discoveri process usual begin with on side give the other a set of written
question call interrogatori an expert assist mai begin by compos the question
or by provid the repli depend on your side of engag both side then submit
request to the other for product of record pertin to the case a financi expert is
often expect to educ a lawyer on the type of document typic avail most
everyth from a singl deposit slip to continu atm videotap to volumin
account ledger is subject to discoveri
mani time financi crime expert on the prosecutor side must scale a mountain of
document or scroll through a heap of comput file to find the core fact that show crimin
intent or behavior the defens mai buri the other side in paper or electron document to
hide or trivial vital document becaus an effici search save time and monei
success expert develop an earli strategi and tick off a detail checklist to achiev their
goal within a specif time frame
when testifi as an expert it often is us to have a list of all other wit includ
those for the other side thi is import so that the expert is not surpris by the exist
of other expert or report on can then determin if it is necessari to be present for the
testimoni of those wit and can obtain the necessari court approv if anoth expert
will be present then it becom incumb upon the expert wit to examin the altern
report and to assess whether or not reason point ar brought up by the other side that
might affect the credibl of the expert report
conflict of interest
when retain expert must quickli determin if ani conflict of interest exist or even
appear to exist in a particular case becaus a conflict might preclud particip a conflict
of interest exist when an expert abil to object evalu and present an issu for a
client will be impair by ani current prior or futur relationship with parti to the litig
there ar sever action an expert can take to determin if ani conflict of interest exist
befor engag ask for the name of all parti involv review the name with your
associ as well request full disclosur of ani connect howev remot prior or
testifi as an expert wit law
2804 2011 fraud examin manual
ongo relationship mai suggest to other that the expert could not provid undivid
loyalti to the caus and your client
penalti for consult or act as an expert in a conflict of interest includ expert
disqualif attornei disqualif and inadmiss of expert testimoni
prepar a report
care consider should be given to the prepar of an expert report which
document your find and opinion for both side it put your reput on the line a
wellwritten report that lai out a strong case might even prompt an earli settlement
howev it also let the opposit see the strength and weak of your case and better
prepar them for your deposit and trial testimoni
keep the follow six tip in mind when prepar an expert report
be brief
avoid ambigu or inexact languag
avoid gener be specif
add chart or graph where appropri
refer your work
meticul check the report for accuraci and neat
an import problem in the prepar of report and account summari aris from
the deleg of task to subordin if the person give evid ha not had direct
knowledg or ha not examin the specif document or prepar the summari the expert
might be trap under the hearsai rule if task ar deleg it is import that the review
process entail comparison of all origin work document
it also is import to know the effect of other assumpt on the conclus or opinion
reach in the report it often is possibl to trap an expert into give altern opinion base
upon assumpt that had not been consid gener work paper and schedul
support the report should not show contradictori conclus as thei mai be produc in
court thi is not to advoc that work paper should be delet or amend subsequ
to prepar rather it is a caution that these paper should be prepar with the precept
that thei could ultim be submit to the court thu the work paper should be
appropri prepar
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2805
onc thei accept a case mani expert immedi start assembl a narr version of the
event thi detail summari of the fact of the case serv as the raw materi for render
an offici opinion it is import that the text be written with care and profession as
the discuss below outlin the text mai and probabl will have to be produc dure
discoveri addition a wellwritten narr help the attornei in prepar and execut
the case at trial
what to includ in an expert wit report
the requir for an expert report differ depend on whether a case is pend in
feder or state court feder rule of civil procedur 26a2 which appli to civil case in
feder court requir expert wit to prepar report and provid them to the oppos
parti although thi requir mai be waiv if direct by the court or agre to by the
principl parti involv the rule appli to expert who have been retain specif for a
given case and it includ employe of a parti if part of the employe duti involv give
expert testimoni a written report often call a rule 26 report must be produc for each
expert wit
convers some state court do not requir written expert report but mai requir anoth
form of mandatori disclosur unfortun the requir of all fifti state ar beyond
the scope of thi manual therefor expert should check with counsel prior to issu their
written report to make sure that the report will compli with ani applic standard or
requir under state law
consult with counsel
gener expert should coordin with counsel to ensur that their report compli with all
applic legal standard failur to compli could result in a disposit of a claim by
summari judgment or an order preclud an expert from testifi
gener includ onli what is necessari
if a written report is request includ onli what is necessari avoid gratuit and
unimport comment at a minimum an expert wit report should do the follow
identifi the reason for the report and provid the matter to be explor by the report
provid the expert witnesss observ and opinion includ the basi rational data
or other inform us to reach the opinion
list ani exhibit us as a summari of or in support of the provid opinion includ
all chart or graph
testifi as an expert wit law
2806 2011 fraud examin manual
state ani conclus the wit mai have reach base on the observ and
inform
provid all sourc includ individu articl sourc document and book that the
expert consult
cite specif test that support the expert conclus and list the standard or test
method us by the expert
rule 26 report and disclosur requir under the feder rule of civil procedur
as note abov expert report in all civil action in feder court must compli with rule 26 of
the feder rule of civil procedur rule 26 state that testifi expert must prepar a
written report and make certain disclosur about their opinion and support ground
specif the expert report which must be prepar and sign by the expert wit must
includ the follow
a complet statement of all expert opinion to be express and the basi and reason for
such opinion
the data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion
ani exhibit to be us as support for or as a summari of the opinion
the qualif of the expert wit
all public author by the expert in the preced 10 year
a list of all other case in which the expert ha testifi as an expert at trial or at
deposit within the preced four year
the expert compens for hi review and testimoni
the feder rule of civil procedur also impos time limit concern rule 26 report the
rule requir that the ident and report of the expert must be disclos at least 90 dai befor
trial but the disclosur of an expert whose testimoni is intend sole to contradict or rebut
anoth witnesss testimoni must be disclos within 30 dai after the other wit
disclosur addition an expert must supplement the written report or deposit
testimoni at least 30 dai befor trial if he becom awar that previou disclosur might
have been materi incomplet or incorrect
if a court find that an expert report fail to satisfi the rule 26 requir it mai strike the
expert design and prohibit the expert from testifi a sampl format for an expert
report is includ at the end of thi chapter
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2807
note that under the feder rule of civil procedur the expert wit must turn over
anyth he us in form hi opinion thu if an expert us privileg or confidenti
document those document must be given to the oppos parti
moreov draft report ar also discover therefor expert should never destroi draft
note record or ani other form of document us to form the expert opinion ani
action to do so mai result in perman loss of the expert credibl in fact the best
practic to prevent discoveri of draft report is not to creat draft report in the first place
these mandatori disclosur requir remain controversi attornei and judg cannot
agre on whether the requir add unnecessari expens or whether thei promot
uniform and fair at least on of those goal uniform ha not been realiz rule 26
provid that the disclosur requir ar mandatori unless a particular district court
provid otherwis by order or local rule sever district court have elect not to adopt rule
26 and have written their own local rule in it place accordingli instead of provid a
uniform system of disclos inform the amend have led to a system of differ
rule for differ district
disclosur requir under the feder rule of crimin procedur
lawyer and expert wit must also mind the rule regard expert disclosur in crimin
case which ar differ from those requir in crimin case in crimin case pretrial
expert disclosur is onli trigger if the defend request it from the govern when thi
happen the govern must produc a written summari of ani testimoni that it intend to
us dure it caseinchief at trial the summari must describ the witnesss opinion the
base and reason for those opinion and the witnesss qualif if the govern
compli and request reciproc disclosur the defend must also provid a summari of
ani expert testimoni he intend to us at trial
expert wit discoveri
concern expert wit discoveri is the process by which the oppos side find out an
expert opinion and underli rational caution is the byword for expert wit at
everi step of the legal process
in gener everyth that a expert wit creat or us is discover accord to frcp
26 which appli to civil case in feder court everyth the expert receiv review reli
produc and sai about the case after be hire is subject to discoveri by oppos
testifi as an expert wit law
2808 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel that mean everyth narr version of the case comment to the press or law
enforc hypothet reconstruct draft report and even note can be demand
and us by the oppos parti a shrewd attornei can us an expert notebook which
contain dry run at an opinion and other pure delib inform to call the
witnesss testimoni into question the onli except as discuss below is when the expert
is hire by the attornei pure on a consult basi
becaus all data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion is
admiss in feder court expert should never destroi draft note record or ani other
form of document us to form the expert opinion feder rule of civil procedur
rule 26a
in legales an expert wit ha no privileg the principl of privileg exist to protect certain
core societ relationship attorneycli husbandwif but the expert witnesss relationship
with client is not among those protect if the expert opinion will be present in court
everyth relat to the expert opinion is discover
in fact anyth an expert carri into a deposit sworn testimoni given by a parti or
wit upon question by counsel for on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court
is subject to discoveri attornei have been known to request a search of someon attach
case to get at import materi thi sharp edg of discoveri is why expert insist on be
depos awai from their own workplac if thei did not their entir file would be subject to
discoveri
the consult expert except
although everyth a expert wit receiv review reli produc and sai is gener
discover there is an except of cours the rule of discoveri gener protect
commun between a consult expert the attornei and the parti from disclosur to
adversari
specif the work of a consult expert is gener not discover becaus it typic
fall under the protect of the work product doctrin to review the work product doctrin
prevent compel disclosur of document and tangibl thing prepar in anticip of
litig and becaus it protect extend to inform prepar by or for a parti or the
parti repres includ consult the work of a consult expert is gener not
discover but otherwis protect materi mai becom discover through waiver and
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2809
the gener test for waiver is whether the materi at issu have been disclos in a manner
inconsist with keep it from an adversari
the distinct between the protect afford to consult and testifi expert is
someth like thi when act as wit expert ar bring offici inform to
the court and thu must disclos ani contact with the case when expert act as consult
or associ for attornei or law enforc thei ar onli assist the attornei and do
not have to disclos their involv in the case
there is of cours on trap for the unwari protect of work product perform by a
consult expert mai be lost when a testifi expert review the work of a consult expert
the rule is that if an expert will testifi at trial everyth he doe regard the case must be
turn over to the other side if an expert work onli as a consult to the attornei then hi
work product is not discover but if a testifi expert review the work of a consult
expert then the work of the consult expert will be discover just rememb thi if you
ar hire to testifi at trial anyth you us to form your opinion will be subject to review by
the oppos parti thi includ note from other expert document receiv from the
plaintiff or defend and ani document or note from the attornei be sure to consult with
the attornei befor you review anyth if a document wa given to you by someon other
than the attornei ask befor you read it otherwis you mai inadvert destroi the
confidenti or privileg of the materi
keep good file
the best wai to protect the confidenti of inform is to keep good file dan poynter
report that expert routin reduc their file to us report onli onc thei have been
offici engag as a wit for trial no on is recommend that file be sanit
poynter add just updat the differ mai be subject to abus but it is simpl ani
materi that serv as the basi for an expert opinion must be in the file note document
or test that serv as background or that repres unfruit line of investig do not have
to be includ and probabl should not be the attornei try the case doesnt want an
expert have to answer about dead end or exploratori jaunt a shrewd crossexamin can
turn a hastili scribbl hypothet into just enough reason doubt to avert a convict
so in the best case scenario an expert present to the court an opinion and it basi noth
more noth less
7 poynter dan the expert wit handbook santa barbara para publish 1997 p 82
testifi as an expert wit law
2810 2011 fraud examin manual
propos chang to expert wit rule relat to expert wit discoveri
recent the judici confer of the unit state advisori committe on feder rule
of civil procedur propos signific amend to rule 26 if adopt the amend
would significantli chang the discover of the data or inform consid by a
testifi expert thi section examin the propos
although almost everyth a testifi expert sai or write is subject to discoveri by
oppos counsel under current law the revis would prohibit the discoveri of draft expert
report and limit discoveri of attorneyexpert commun more specif the
amend would among other thing make the follow three chang
commun between counsel and retain testifi expert would gener be
protect from disclosur or discoveri thi amend would offer work product
protect similar to those alreadi avail to consult expert
draft report and disclosur requir by rule 26a2 of ani testifi expert would no
longer be discover
rule 26 report produc by a testifi expert would onli need to includ the fact or
data consid by the expert current rule 26a2 read data or other inform
consid which court have interpret to includ everyth commun by
counsel to the expert thu the amend emphas that expert should onli includ
factual inform in their report
these amend ar expect to be adopt and becom effect on dec 1 2010 as
amend
qualifi to testifi as an expert wit
just what constitut expert statu gener the term expert wit refer to someon
whose educ and profession credenti establish their knowledg of a particular set of
practic as with introduc exhibit in trial counsel must lai a foundat for the expert
testimoni thi mean show that by formal educ advanc studi or experi the
wit is suffici knowledg on the subject at hand that is a wit must be
qualifi to testifi as an expert the foundat mai be establish dure the pretrial stage
or dure direct examin
unfortun it is becom increasingli difficult to testifi in feder court as an expert and
to understand the standard and rule to qualifi as an expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2811
rule 702 of the feder rule of evid govern the admiss of expert testimoni in
feder court rule 702 provid that a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi in the form of an opinion or otherwis to
scientif technic or other special knowledg if such testimoni will assist the trier of
fact to understand the evid or to determin the fact in issu
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut 509 us 579 1993 the suprem court state that
judg should act as gatekeep and keep out scientif testimoni that is not base on the
method of scienc in a relat case titl kumho tire co v carmichael 526 us 137 1999
the suprem court state that the judg gatekeep function appli not just in case
deal with scientif evid but in ani case involv testimoni base on technic and
other special knowledgetaken togeth these case mean that expert testimoni given
by certifi fraud examin account or other expert must be judg against the
standard set forth by the suprem court in the daubert case
in respons to these case rule 702 of the feder rule of evid wa modifi to
specif includ the standard set forth by the suprem court in daubert and kumho tire
rule 702 now read
if scientif technic or other special knowledg will assist the trier of fact to understand the
evid or to determin a fact in issu a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwis if 1
the testimoni is base upon suffici fact or data 2 the testimoni is the product of reliabl
principl and method and 3 the wit ha ap pli the principl and method reliabl to the
fact of the case
simpli put rule 702 provid that the judg must make three determin befor allow
an expert to testifi befor the juri
is the person qualifi as an expert wit
will the expertis of the wit assist the juri in understand the evid or
determin a fact at issu in other word is the testimoni relev to the fact of the
case
is the testimoni reliabl
qualif
befor admit expert testimoni the judg must determin that the expert is a qualifi
testifi as an expert wit law
2812 2011 fraud examin manual
practition thi element address whether the individu is qualifi to assist the trier of
fact for a wit to qualifi as an expert counsel must establish that the wit is suffici
knowledg on the subject at hand by show formal educ skill or experi the
determin of whether a wit is qualifi as an expert or whether expert testimoni is
need is left to the discret of the trial judg
the process of evalu whether an expert is qualifi mainli center on the candid
formal educ and work experi whether that includ 30 year in law enforc or
10 year in a larg account firm but there is no particular educ requir for
expert testimoni a wit with no formal educ mai be qualifi base on train or
experi some other factor that mai be consid includ the candid
award and honor
licens or certif
technic train
publish book and journal articl
posit in profession associ societi and organ
in addit to be qualifi as an expert the expert qualif must be relev to the
particular issu in the case at hand but the import thing to rememb is that a person
can be qualifi as an expert base on either special train or experi a person doe not
have to be a cfe to testifi as an expert on fraud detect techniqu if that person ha
suffici practic experi in those techniqu the cfe design is import becaus
it serv as a recognit of the special skill that those hold the design have
demonstr to becom a cfe
although design ar import it is most help to have prior experi as an expert
with litig or crimin matter thi is primarili becaus of what is learn dure the
experi of testifi further it often is help to have been accept as an expert in other
case therebi eas current accept a danger exist howev of appear to be a
profession wit
the counsel introduc the wit often will read the expert qualif or ask specif
question to establish the witnesss credenti smart defens lawyer ar not like to
challeng the credenti of expert assum thei meet at least minimum standard of
profession compet to do so mai give these expert an opportun to fulli highlight
their profession credenti and perhap make a greater impress on the juri or judg thu
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2813
ad more weight to their testimoni although the expert qualif ar not often
contest it doe happen beyond be accept by both parti the expert wit most
importantli must be accept by the court
testimoni
after determin that a wit is a qualifi expert the trial judg must determin that the
testimoni offer by the expert is relev to the fact of the case and reliabl these two
question focu on what opinion the expert will actual testifi to in court
relev testimoni will assist the juri in understand the evid or determin a fact at
issu to be relev the propos testimoni must be suffici ti to the fact of the case
that it will aid the juri in resolv a factual disput specif the court must determin
whether the expert opinion ha ani tenden cy to make the exist of ani fact more
probabl than it would be without the evid testimoni is not relev if the juri can make
it own determin without expert testimoni
to be reliabl the testimoni must be base on suffici fact and data and it must be the
product of reliabl methodolog that ha been reliabl appli to the fact of the case thi
assur that an expert opinion ar not mere specul
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut inc the suprem court set forth the follow nonexclus
list of factor to assess reliabl
whether the expert theori or techniqu can be or ha been test
whether the expert theori or techniqu ha been subject to peer review and
public
whether the expert theori or techniqu enjoi gener accept within the relev
scientif commun
whether there ar standard govern the method us by the expert
whether the expert techniqu ha a high error rate
accordingli cfe should be sure to fulli cover the rational for their assumpt and
determin whether the assumpt ar support by the fact present dure discoveri in
fact court often find that assumpt not support by evid render expert opinion
insuffici thu caus the judg to exclud the expert testimoni for exampl in target
market publish inc v advo inc a breach of contract case aris from a joint ventur to
produc advertis public a wellqualifi account and busi apprais conclud
testifi as an expert wit law
2814 2011 fraud examin manual
that had the defend perform it contractu oblig the joint ventur would have
earn 14 million in profit to reach thi conclus the expert assum the joint ventur
would have successfulli enter 49 market zone at the time of the breach but the joint
ventur had onli enter into two market zone and wa unprofit in both the
appel court affirm the exclus of the expert opinion as to the valu of a contract
becaus the methodolog underli the opinion wa base upon subject belief and
specul includ unsupport assumpt
when prepar an expert report or testimoni examin should keep in mind the daubert
factor set forth abov examin should document their conclus how thei reach
those conclus what evid thei base the conclus on and what profession
techniqu or knowledg thei us it would also be a good idea to keep a list of profession
book or journal that advoc or sanction whatev principl were us in draw the
conclus
daubert challeng
a daubert challeng is a motion rais either befor or dure trial to exclud an expert
wit from present evid thi motion is us to exclud the testimoni of an expert
who lack suffici expertis or us question method
basi of expert testimoni
rule 703 of the feder rule of evid govern the sourc on which expert mai base
their testimoni it provid that expert mai reli on fact or data made known to the expert at
or befor the hear
the fact or data in the particular case upon which an expert base an opinion or infer mai
be those perceiv by or made known to the expert at or befor the hear if of a type reason
reli upon by expert in the particular field in form opinion or infer upon the subject the
fact or data need not be admiss in evid in order for the opinion or infer to be
admit
therefor under rule 703 an expert mai base an opinion on
firsthand observ
fact data or opinion present at trial
fact data or opinion convei outsid of court
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2815
in addit under rule 703 expert can reli on inadmiss hearsai or other inadmiss
evid as long as it is the type reason reli upon by expert in the particular field a
determin that is left to the discret of the trial judg thi rule allow an expert to
emploi data usual us by expert in the field though the data itself mai not be admiss
an exampl might be a tabl of interest rate taken from a depart of commerc
public similarli an account serv as an expert wit mai reli on privat sourc
in form an opinion if such sourc normal ar reli upon by account
the major of state howev follow the common law rule which permit a more limit
basi for expert testimoni most state requir the expert to predic testimoni on firsthand
percept or in the altern inform admit in evid at the hear at which
he is call to testifi
prepar to testifi
the major of case file will not go to trial thei will be resolv through either a
settlement agreement or a plea bargain therefor most expert experi in testifi
come through have their deposit taken
deposit of expert wit
a deposit is sworn testimoni given by a parti or wit upon question by counsel for
on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court a deposit serv as a power
discoveri devic that mai be us to compel anyon associ with the case to give oral
testimoni under oath although you cannot declin to testifi an expert mai be allow to
specifi a conveni time and place
sometim the parti request the deposit pai the oppos expert fee which consist
of the time spent give the deposit at hi standard hourli rate or in halfdai or fulldai
increment plu travel time thi usual occur in feder court most state court requir
each side to pai the expens of the expert thei hire an expert charg hi client for the
time spent prepar for deposit and for testifi
in addit to the requir court report the proceed mai be record by a camera or a
voic record a judg is not present dure thi questionandansw session for skill
investig deposit provid a golden opportun to hear the other side case aloud
the opposit mai set ulterior goal as well includ
testifi as an expert wit law
2816 2011 fraud examin manual
to learn new inform or confirm exist fact
to apprais the expert abil as a wit
to lock the expert into a hardtodefend posit
to creat a written record for futur impeach
befor testifi at a deposit or at trial the expert should ensur that requir graphic
displai ar readi and avail that all import discuss with the lawyer have been held
and that the expert ha a complet understand of the report and other relev issu the
expert should ensur that he ha agreement with counsel as to the sequenc of evid and
the strategi for present it it often is us to have a dry run at the direct testimoni with
all the question pose by the counsel to the expert to avoid surpris dure trial
at pretestimoni meet it is appropri to discuss the qualif of the wit again
to ensur that thei ar current to discuss the strength and weak of the case and to
discuss and agre on what part of the expert report if ani ar to be enter as exhibit
appear
the appear of the expert wit often lend itself to an assess of the credibl of
that wit it is recommend that the wit wear conserv busi attir be wellgroom
and neatli dress
it is also import that the wit maintain a profession demeanor in the wit box the
wit should maintain a pois alert appear stand firmli and be readi to take the oath
the wit should not smile gratuit at the judg juri or the lawyer also it is
import that the wit keep control of hi hand to avoid fidget and wit should
maintain ey contact with the question as much as possibl he should not stare off into
space at the floor or at the ceil
as the judg will be take note the wit should speak slowli to ensur that the judg
doe not fall behind the answer should be direct to the question the witnesss voic
should be strong clear and audibl thu befor answer each question the wit should
paus befor answer and carefulli consid the answer he should also respond in a slow
and deliber manner
do and dont
there ar other consider in make an expert a credibl wit some tip ar
exud an alert and confid attitud
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2817
maintain profession pride and integr throughout
tell the truth be honest and avoid bia
us simpl rather than complex term and refrain from us profession jargon
explain complex concept in a layperson term
be friendli and polit to all parti present
be alert
correct ani misstat as soon as thei ar detect
listen carefulli and answer the specif questionsdo not go off on tangent or volunt
more than the question requir
do not verbal fenc with the attornei
do not try to be humor or hip
be calm and deliber in respond to questionsthink befor you speak
plan your testimoni in advanc and know your materi thoroughli
us graph chart and other visual aid if thei help to clarifi a point
do not read from note if you can avoid it the opposit lawyer will probabl demand to
see such note and the wit will then look like he rehears hi testimoni
prepar your materi complet if you have document to introduc have them
organ so that you can quickli retriev them when ask to do so
do not hem and haw or stammer recov your composur when a tough or complex
question is pose
ask for a question to be repeat or clarifi if not fulli comprehend
if an answer is not known sai so do not guess
do not invent and do not inflat
in crossexamin do not respond too quickli becaus counsel might wish to object to
the question
do not be evas
sever other thing should also be avoid these rang from drink five cup of coffe
immedi prior to testimoni or chew bubbl gum while give evid to small
physic manner that might affect your appear these physic manner which
might be as simpl as rub on hand togeth continu look down at on hand
fidget on the stand or jingl coin in a pocket could becom irrit to the judg and
juri
similar to trial proceed the opposit commonli drill an expert about hi credenti hi
methodolog and hi conclus pertain to the case unlik in a trial the expert quit
testifi as an expert wit law
2818 2011 fraud examin manual
often answer ters give onli a straight ye or no for inquiri that requir more you
should respond directli and precis and refrain from volunt ani inform it is not
your duti to educ the other side at deposit you mai ask for a recess or a break if
need
pour over the written transcript of your deposit afterward to ensur accuraci
immedi correct ani omiss or error whether made by you or the stenograph
notifi your lawyer if your opinion ha chang sinc deposit if you ar present at the
deposit of the oppos expert you mai be ask to summar your impress
afterward and note ani grai area that call for further line of inquiri
direct examin
direct examin ar conduct by the attornei who retain the expert becaus expert
ar hire for their opinion thei ar not subject to the usual restrict about statement of
judgment expert also have other leewai not given to ordinari wit thei mai reli on
document or exchang that would otherwis be inadmiss as hearsai thi allow them to
us articl academ paper profession text and consult in render their opinion
of the case these materi ar admiss as long as thei were us by the expert in
develop hi opinion
present expert testimoni
expert wit present their find in variou wai such as narr question
hypothet special materi and special exhibit expert ar commonli ask to
answer narr question which ar all but forbidden to lai wit narr question ar
broad openend question that allow expert to present their opinion in their own word
with minim prompt from the lawyer fraud case with their diverg path of activ
and intrigu can requir complex summar in order for the fact to make ani sens the
averag group of juror ha never consid how someon could manipul store
inventori to drive up the compani stock price and then make million on the phoni surg
the expert wit in case like thi often will begin testimoni by recount the narr
background of a case the test and experi that were perform dure the investig
and a summari of the find base on hi profession expertis
expert wit also ar allow to demonstr their find by us hypothet fiction
situat analog to the act in question which clarifi and highlight particular aspect of
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2819
the disput but to be effect hypothet must be construct exquisit appeal court
have been adam that the fact of the case be tri have to be reflect directli in the
hypothet situat there must be no exagger or obscur in the present
moreov expert sometim us special ma terial in reach and commun their
opinion profession public and sourc of inform that normal ar us in the
cours of busi mai be produc as part of the trial feder rule requir onli that the
sourc be gener us and reli on by peopl in that field
final expert mai us special exhibit to demonstr fact about the case or some aspect of
their opinion these exhibit mai includ chart diagram annot document or photo
if the exhibit is offer to prove a fact it must satisfi the rule applic to ani other piec of
evid in the case in demonstr a profession opinion the role of the exhibit must be
clear and it applic to the present case justifi if necessari
direct testimoni consider
the purpos of direct examin is to enabl counsel for the side you repres to draw out
the evid to prove the case most like thi will onli be a reiter of what previous
ha been discuss with your counsel outsid the courtroom it is still veri import
howev to refresh your memori beforehand by refer to anyth you mai have read
written or given in evid on the case
direct examin is the most organ aspect of the trial it is the stage in which the
expert credibl must be establish with the judg or juri accord to the concept of the
primari memori peopl rememb best what thei hear first and last thi often is a us
idea to emploi in give or structur evid anoth noteworthi point is that the juror
often have limit attent span in a long trial thu it is often us to us a
grabgiveconclud method of present evid
to a wit the interpret of question and the abil to listen ar crucial skill even
though the wit might alreadi have gone through a mock direct examin it is critic
that each question be carefulli evalu again the wit should reflect upon the question
ask and not anticip them thei might have been chang anywai sinc the time of
rehears
the answer to all question should be clear and concis and where complex term ar us
testifi as an expert wit law
2820 2011 fraud examin manual
thei should be clarifi similarli explain complex concept in a layperson term and avoid
profession jargon becaus the fact finder might not be familiar with esoter or technic
terminolog
us of note should be limit as much as possibl to maintain ey contact
schedul if ani should be describ accur and succinctli in easili understood term
schedul ar by their natur concis document and should be describ in that manner
if opinion ar given thei should be state with convict
certain standard for certifi fraud examin ar found in the code of profession ethic
pleas see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
specif certifi fraud examin ar prohibit from express opinion as to the guilt
or innoc of ani person or parti thi is not to sai that the expert wit cannot testifi to
the badg hallmark or characterist of fraud found in the case it also doe not mean that
the certifi fraud examin cannot testifi that base on the evid he believ the
accus might have commit the offens howev the ultim guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti is the sole respons of the judg and juri the certifi fraud examin
typic will not be permit to testifi to the ultim fact question
crossexamin
crossexamin is truli the highlight of the adversari court system it is gear to allow
counsel either to clarifi or to make point at the witnesss expens it gener is the most
difficult part of the trial process for ani wit anyth can turn up that might refut or
embarrass the wit the witnesss credibl is constantli call into question
the goal of the oppos counsel dure crossexamin ar threefold the first goal is to
diminish the import of the expert testimoni just present the second goal is to have
the expert testifi in support of the oppos posit by provid a seri of assumpt
the third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequaci in the expert
opinion therebi discredit the opinion the report and the wit
the oppos counsel can attack or question anyth that ha been said or enter into court
thi includ note work paper affidavit willsai report and preliminari trial or
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2821
discoveri transcript often crossexamin creat an atmospher of confront and
contradict
the wit must not take attack or attempt to discredit person there ar mani wai to
discredit an expert wit throughout the process it is import for the wit to maintain
pride and profession integr an adag to rememb is that even mud can be worn well
oppos counsel want to reduc or limit the impact of the witnesss evid it is natur
to feel a certain amount of apprehens and thi might do a great deal to keep the wit
alert the juri often watch the judg and thu the expert often can take a clue as to the
tempo and reaction of the juri and the judg to the evid be present slight chang
in style and present could be made accordingli
the oppos counsel usual ha a plan of crossexamin in mind and an expert wit
should be abl to anticip thi direct to prevent fall into a trap a danger to thi of
cours is that the wit will spend as much time plan ahead as answer the question
and might not be give appropri attent to the immedi question further in
attempt to anticip a question the wit might misunderstand what is actual ask
gener it is a rule of thumb that a wit should not volunt or freeli give inform
dure the answer it often might be extrem difficult to avoid get trap in variou
assumpt what if scenario and gener present by counsel dure crossexamin
if thi occur or if ask a long or imprecis question retrench by ask for a
question to be rephras in smaller compon
it is critic never to underestim the expertis of the oppos counsel often oppos
counsel will be underplai it understand of the issu to lull the expert into a sens of
secur thi can lead the expert into a difficult situat oppos counsel golden rule is to
crossexamin onli if it would benefit the case in ask question of the wit oppos
counsel gener either will ask short question in plain word or will ask lead question
usual counsel know the answer to the question
the oppos counsel gener will evalu answer and then take a specif approach that
further the argument gener the wit will not be allow to explain or elabor on
the question as that would allow the wit to alter the thrust of a carefulli orchestr
testifi as an expert wit law
2822 2011 fraud examin manual
crossexamin oppos counsel will continu question or evalu how the last
question and answer could be us against the wit
furthermor oppos counsel often will prepar by research the expert for exampl it is
like that counsel will read all earlier testimoni and public of the wit oppos
counsel also might speak to other lawyer as to the witnesss capabl in court if the lawyer
have had experi with the wit if weak ar discov the question probabl
will be direct to that area
oppos counsel also might attempt to take psycholog control of a wit by
us physic presenc to intimid
make nonstop ey contact
challeng space of the wit
ask question at a fast pace to confus the wit
not allow the expert to explain or deviat from the exact question
physic domin often is us by oppos counsel oppos counsel will quickli
discov the respons pattern of the expert and might take an aggress stanc to lead the
expert to the point where he is unsur
counsel mai emploi the follow strateg method to discredit a wit or to diminish the
import of a witnesss testimoni these method could be us alon or in conjunct
with on anoth and ar not an allencompass list a good counsel in crossexamin
will quickli discov the witnesss weak area and emploi ani possibl techniqu to achiev
it goal
myopic vision
myopic vision entail get the expert to admit to a great amount of time be spent in the
investig of a matter then select an area to highlight about which the expert is unsur
or ha not done much work thi area might not be central to the issu in the case but it
must be relev to the conclus reach then the oppos counsel will make a larg
issu of it and prove that the expert vision is myopic in that the work wa limit in extent
or scope and as such substandard at the same time the matter of fee could be drawn in to
show that larg sum were expend to have thi obvious incomplet work done
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2823
safeti
thi approach involv lull the expert into a feel of fals secur by not attack him
after the expert feel secur the oppos counsel might find a small hole in the expert
testimoni that can be enlarg quickli thi approach often is character by be friendli
and conciliatori by which the juri is made sympathet to the caus of the oppos counsel
oppos counsel also might attempt to achiev a certain amount of associ with the
wit that will make the wit want to help the oppos counsel to bring out
inform do so mai result in the wit give inform that otherwis would not
have been given with thi addit inform it might be possibl to find a chink or hole
in the evid and open it further
contradict
oppos counsel might us lead question to forc the wit into a hard or
contradictori posit altern counsel can establish the credibl in court of a
potenti contradict document or quot from other articl written by expert in the field
if these document or articl ar in contradict to the expert then an admiss can be
obtain from the expert as to that contradict if a contradict exit the expert might be
drawn into an argument as to who is the most appropri or experienc person instanc
also occur in which a wit ha contradict himself or hi own articl written sever year
prior mere becaus of hi lack of memori or confus due to the attack
new inform
oppos counsel mai introduc new inform of which the expert might not be awar
thi normal is done to introduc confus in the witnesss mind in the hope that the
wit might contradict himself or develop a seri of altern scenario given the new
inform to show that the exist report and opinion ar no longer of valu
support oppos side theori
thi approach recogn an expert qualif and evid the same inform us
by the expert is then interpret by oppos counsel in a differ fashion to support an
altern theori by get the expert to agre to the altern interpret of the fact and
the altern theori the oppos counsel in effect ha made the expert a wit for the
other side thi techniqu is us to obtain concess from the wit that would damag
hi conclus and ultim hi credibl
testifi as an expert wit law
2824 2011 fraud examin manual
bia
thi method draw the expert counsel and the expert togeth to show possibl collus as
to the evid be present and henc to demonstr bia thi can be shown if the
oppos counsel can determin that the expert counsel had instruct the wit as to
what to sai or by limit the expert scope and thu hi conclus thi approach also can
focu on the question of whether or not the expert wa told by hi client what to do and look
for with thi approach oppos counsel might attempt to show that the expert overlook
import document in an effort to assist hi client
confront
thi method involv the us of a confront of will to put the wit into a situat in
which he might lose emot control and show anger onc a wit ha explod
credibl normal disappear
sound board
thi method us the wit as a sound board to reacquaint the juri with the favor
aspect to oppos counsel of the case thi techniqu often us the is it not true and
would you agre with me approach constant agreement is us to browbeat the expert
in the ey of the judg and juri agreement with variou question rais by the oppos
counsel also might be assum to be a gener concurr with the posit of the oppos
counsel
fee
thi method attack the wit on the basi of take an inordin amount of time for the
result given the attack might indic a lack of complet work and be correl to the fee
charg thi method often is relat to bia and myopic vision it might be suggest
that the wit and hi opinion ar in fact bias thi techniqu often build to a
conclus in which the oppos counsel arriv at the idea that the work wa superfici and
unprofession yet a great deal of monei wa receiv by the expert for thi and other area
of servic to the client the infer is that the testimoni wa purchas or that the expert
wa paid to overlook fact contradictori to the conclus reach
term of engag
thi techniqu normal is emploi by obtain the origin engag letter and
examin the term of engag oppos counsel can then show that the expert
intend to look onli at variou item in support of hi client and gloss over altern
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2825
theori gener to the detriment of the opposit as such the wit could be portrai
as partial
discredit the wit
discredit the wit is base on prove that the expert is unworthi to be a credibl
wit instructor to the court thi often can be accomplish by show that the expert is
current or ha previous been grossli bias prejud or corrupt been convict of
crimin activ been shown to engag in immor activ made inconsist statement
acquir a reput for a lack of verac or exagger hi qualif discredit also
could consist of look at the qualiti of the expert educ background to reveal ani
other unusu activ that might bia the wit or exclud him from the court as an expert
person attack
anoth crossexamin tactic often us by attornei is to kill the messeng these
attack ar of a more person natur and gener includ some of the follow
the wit is unqualifi
the wit displai unprofession behavior dure the examin such as ask
person or sexual question dure interview
the wit had a conflict of interest
the wit wa harass phone call at home threaten voic mail etc
failur to follow the standard of the profess
addition the attornei mai attempt to discredit expert by try to show that thei fail to
follow the standard best practic or profession conduct rule set forth by their profess
such as the acf for fraud examin or other profession bodi such as the aicpa the
iia or state bar associ
for cfe it is extrem import to be familiar with the tool and techniqu set forth in
the fraud examin manual there have been case where enterpris defens attornei have
obtain copi of the manual and quizz the fraud examin about whether or not the
method set forth in the manual were follow likewis attornei will often question cfe
about the acf code of profession ethic particularli regard the prohibit against
state an opinion of guilt or innoc which is discuss below
it is import to understand that the fraud examin manual doe not set forth standard
the manual provid the cfe with inform suggest and method for conduct a
testifi as an expert wit law
2826 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud examin a cfe is alwai requir to follow the code of profession ethic but
he is not requir to follow what is set forth in the fraud examin manual
howev if a fraud examin deviat from the normal investig method set forth in the
manual he should have an explan as to why it wa appropri and explain that the
manual is onli provid as guidanc
express an opinion on guilt
as previous discuss testifi expert wit give opinion testimoni which is base
upon their special knowledg and experi about case issu but expert mai onli give
opinion testimoni in area that will aid the juror in reach their verdict addition
expert mai give opinion testimoni on ultim issu ie the basic conclus upon which
the outcom of a case depend but thei cannot offer legal conclus or educ the juri on
the principl of law
moreov articl five of the acf code of profession ethic prohibit opinion regard
the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
a fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid or other document to
establish a reason basi for ani opinion render no opinion shall be express regard the
guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
thi rule is a rule of prudenc for exampl it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to
refrain from usurp the role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi
fraud examin for such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such evid might
constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person howev a clear
line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid and on
that step over the line and sai he is the guilti innoc person nevertheless there is a
fine line between recommend action forward the evid to a law enforc
agenc or file a complaint or lawsuit and give an opinion on guilt or innoc certifi
fraud examin might make such recommend becaus thei think the evid is
strong enough to support a case thei might even have a conclus about whether the
suspect commit a crime the rule doe not prohibit the certifi fraud examin under
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2827
the proper circumst from accus the person under investig howev the
ultim decis of whether a person is guilti or innoc is for a juri to determin the
cfe is free to report the fact and the conclus that can be drawn from those fact but the
decis as to whether or not a person is guilti of a crime is a decis for the judg or juri
wit immun for expert
gener feder and state court grant fact wit immun for their testimoni at trial
there ar three commonli cite public polici rational for grant thi immun first the
immun rule prevent selfcensorship of the wit second without immun wit
mai be inclin to distort their testimoni in fear of a retaliatori suit third the crossexamin
process ensur truth and reliabl testimoni
furthermor court have extend wit immun to includ advers expert wit and
courtappoint expert wit thi immun gener appli to trial testimoni
deposit testimoni and report prepar court grant immun to advers and courtappoint
expert for numer reason includ the longstand common law wit
immun doctrin the prevent of wit selfcensorship and the belief that the judici
system adequ ensur truth and reliabl testimoni howev even though immun is
the gener rule for advers and courtappoint expert court have deni immun and
permit neglig claim where testifi expert breach their profession duti to act
within the standard of care
despit the wit immun discuss abov recent case indic that expert wit mai
be liabl to their retain parti for their pretrial work or testimoni rule that expert
wit should not be immun from liabil from their own client in fact a grow
number of state have allow parti to sue their own expert for neglig testimoni
includ california connecticut louisiana massachusett missouri new jersei and
pennsylvania
the underli base for deni immun to friendli expert ar gener found on the
follow rational 1 the common law grou nd for immun ar narrow 2 potenti
liabil encourag total and honest testimoni 3 expert should be held to the standard of
their profess 4 the role of the paid advisor and advoc warrant allow claim and 5
the judici system doe not adequ ensur truth and reliabl testimoni from friendli
expert
testifi as an expert wit law
2828 2011 fraud examin manual
expert wit should be awar that the wit immun defens for expert is erod
and as a result suit alleg that expert wit commit fraud or neglig ar
increas moreov the presenc of expert wit in the legal system will not decreas in
the near futur therefor it is import that expert wit understand the liabil and
protect place upon them
summari
in hi book succeed as an expert wit harold a feder suggest keep the follow in
mind while you ar work on a particular case
keep an open mind
do not approach a case with predetermin conclus as to causat culpabl fault
or damag
rememb that attornei and client come to you with fact that might be slant either
accident or purposefulli
carefulli follow your own wellestablish investig step develop form procedur
and process that will ensur that you do not overlook evid
on of the best thing you can do is to stai current about new develop in your field it
take a concert effort to stai on top of chang and advanc in ani industri as well as the
latest forens investig method to be a success expert wit in ani area of
account for instanc you must have a thorough knowledg of not onli gener accept
account principl but also current promulg for case involv credit card fraud
you must have a basic understand of your nation electron bank system while activ
practic in your field of expertis in other word experi remain your singl most
valuabl sourc of knowledg other sourc abound
action which maintain and improv your current credenti and make you a better expert
wit includ
pursu continu educ and train opportun
read trade journal and public
join and particip in profession societi and associ
teach lectur and hold seminar
attend special seminar and workshop
write for trade journal and public
take advanc comput cours
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2829
you can practic your oral deliveri skill and henc improv your credibl by activ
pursu public speak engag and opportun
similarli to feel more comfort on the legal stage you mai wish to visit your local
courtroom to observ anoth financi expert give testimoni in similar case cabl
televis especi local govern show and the courttv channel also offer a chanc
to see other expert in action in a varieti of situat
2011 fraud examin manual 3101
