2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Pre-trial Preparation


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Pre-trial Preparation 
Pre-trial preparation remains key to becoming a successful expert witness, and success often 
depends on full inquiry and thorough investigation. Following the initial complaint and 
answer, the discovery process usually begins with one side giving the other a set of written 
questions, called interrogatories. An expert’s assistance may begin by composing the questions 
or by providing the replies, depending on your side of engagement. Both sides then submit 
requests to the other for production of records pertinent to the case. A financial expert is 
often expected to educate a lawyer on the types of documents typically available. Most 
everything — from a single deposit slip to continuous ATM videotapes to voluminous 
accounting ledgers — is subject to discovery. 
 
Many times financial crime experts on the prosecutor’s side must scale a mountain of 
documents or scroll through a heap of computer files to find the core facts that show criminal 
intent or behavior. The defense may bury the other side in paper or electronic documents to 
hide or trivialize vital documentation. Because an efficient search saves time and money, 
successful experts develop an early strategy and tick off a detailed checklist to achieve their 
goals within a specific time frame. 
 
When testifying as an expert, it often is useful to have a list of all other witnesses, including 
those for the other side. This is important so that the expert is not surprised by the existence 
of other experts or reports. One can then determine if it is necessary to be present for the 
testimony of those witnesses and can obtain the necessary court approval. If another expert 
will be present, then it becomes incumbent upon the expert witness to examine the alternate 
reports and to assess whether or not reasonable points are brought up by the other side that 
might affect the credibility of the expert’s report. 
 
 



:


pretrial prepar
pretrial prepar remain kei to becom a success expert wit and success often
depend on full inquiri and thorough investig follow the initi complaint and
answer the discoveri process usual begin with on side give the other a set of written
question call interrogatori an expert assist mai begin by compos the question
or by provid the repli depend on your side of engag both side then submit
request to the other for product of record pertin to the case a financi expert is
often expect to educ a lawyer on the type of document typic avail most
everyth from a singl deposit slip to continu atm videotap to volumin
account ledger is subject to discoveri
mani time financi crime expert on the prosecutor side must scale a mountain of
document or scroll through a heap of comput file to find the core fact that show crimin
intent or behavior the defens mai buri the other side in paper or electron document to
hide or trivial vital document becaus an effici search save time and monei
success expert develop an earli strategi and tick off a detail checklist to achiev their
goal within a specif time frame
when testifi as an expert it often is us to have a list of all other wit includ
those for the other side thi is import so that the expert is not surpris by the exist
of other expert or report on can then determin if it is necessari to be present for the
testimoni of those wit and can obtain the necessari court approv if anoth expert
will be present then it becom incumb upon the expert wit to examin the altern
report and to assess whether or not reason point ar brought up by the other side that
might affect the credibl of the expert report
