2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing a Report


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Preparing a Report 
Careful consideration should be given to the preparation of an expert report, which 
documents your findings and opinions for both sides. It puts your reputation on the line. A 
well-written report that lays out a strong case might even prompt an early settlement. 
However, it also lets the opposition see the strengths and weaknesses of your case and better 
prepares them for your deposition and trial testimony.  
 
Keep the following six tips in mind when preparing an expert report: 
• Be brief 
• Avoid ambiguity or inexact language 
• Avoid generalizations; be specific 
• Add charts or graphs where appropriate 
• Reference your work 
• Meticulously check the report for accuracy and neatness 
 
An important problem in the preparation of reports and accounting summaries arises from 
the delegation of tasks to subordinates. If the person giving evidence has not had direct 
knowledge or has not examined the specific documents or prepared the summaries, the expert 
might be trapped under the hearsay rule. If tasks are delegated, it is important that the review 
process entails comparison of all original work documentation. 
 
It also is important to know the effect of other assumptions on the conclusion or opinion 
reached in the report. It often is possible to trap an expert into giving alternate opinions based 
upon assumptions that had not been considered. Generally, working papers and schedules 
supporting the report should not show contradictory conclusions as they may be produced in 
court. This is not to advocate that working papers should be deleted or amended subsequent 
to preparation; rather, it is a caution that these papers should be prepared with the precept 
that they could ultimately be submitted to the court. Thus, the work papers should be 
appropriately prepared.  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.805 
Once they accept a case, many experts immediately start assembling a narrative version of the 
events. This detailed summary of the facts of the case serves as the raw material for rendering 
an official opinion. It is important that the text be written with care and professionalism — as 
the discussion below outlines, the text may (and probably will) have to be produced during 
discovery. Additionally, a well-written narrative helps the attorney in preparing and executing 
the case at trial. 
 
What to Include in an Expert Witness Report  
The requirements for an expert report differ depending on whether a case is pending in 
federal or state court. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(a)(2), which applies to civil cases in 
federal court, requires expert witnesses to prepare reports and provide them to the opposing 
parties, although this requirement may be waived if directed by the court or agreed to by the 
principle parties involved. The rule applies to experts who have been retained specifically for a 
given case, and it includes employees of a party if part of the employees’ duties involves giving 
expert testimony. A written report, often called a Rule 26 report, must be produced for each 
expert witness.  
 
Conversely, some state courts do not require written expert reports but may require another 
form of mandatory disclosures. Unfortunately, the requirements of all fifty states are beyond 
the scope of this manual. Therefore, experts should check with counsel prior to issuing their 
written report to make sure that the report will comply with any applicable standards or 
requirements under state law. 
 
Consult with Counsel 
Generally, experts should coordinate with counsel to ensure that their reports comply with all 
applicable legal standards. Failure to comply could result in a disposition of a claim by 
summary judgment or an order precluding an expert from testifying. 
 
Generally, Include Only What Is Necessary 
If a written report is requested, include only what is necessary. Avoid gratuitous and 
unimportant comments. At a minimum, an expert witness report should do the following: 
• Identify the reason for the report and provide the matter to be explored by the report 
• Provide the expert witness’s observations and opinions, including the basis, rationale, data, 
or other information used to reach the opinions 
• List any exhibits used as a summary of or in support of the provided opinions, including 
all charts or graphs 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.806  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• State any conclusions the witness may have reached based on the observations and 
information 
• Provide all sources, including individuals, articles, sources, documents, and books that the 
expert consulted 
• Cite specific tests that support the expert’s conclusion and list the standards or test 
methods used by the expert 
 
Rule 26 Reports and Disclosure Requirements Under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedures 
As noted above, expert reports in all civil actions in federal court must comply with Rule 26 of 
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 26 states that testifying experts must prepare a 
written report and make certain disclosures about their opinions and supporting grounds. 
Specifically, the expert report, which must be prepared and signed by the expert witness, must 
include the following: 
• A complete statement of all expert opinions to be expressed and the basis and reasons for 
such opinions 
• The data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinion 
• Any exhibits to be used as support for or as a summary of the opinions 
• The qualifications of the expert witness 
• All publications authored by the expert in the preceding 10 years 
• A list of all other cases in which the expert has testified as an expert at trial or at 
deposition within the preceding four years 
• The expert’s compensation for his review and testimony 
 
The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure also impose time limits concerning Rule 26 Reports. The 
rules require that the identity and report of the expert must be disclosed at least 90 days before 
trial. But the disclosure of an expert whose testimony is intended solely to contradict or rebut 
another witness’s testimony must be disclosed within 30 days after the other witness’ 
disclosure. Additionally, an expert must supplement the written report or deposition 
testimony at least 30 days before trial if he becomes aware that previous disclosures might 
have been materially incomplete or incorrect. 
 
If a court finds that an expert report fails to satisfy the Rule 26 requirements, it may strike the 
expert designation and prohibit the expert from testifying. A sample format for an expert 
report is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.807 
Note that under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the expert witness must turn over 
anything he used in forming his opinion. Thus, if an expert uses privileged or confidential 
documents, those documents must be given to the opposing party. 
 
Moreover, draft reports are also discoverable. Therefore, experts should never destroy drafts, 
notes, recordings, or any other form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion. Any 
action to do so may result in permanent loss of the expert’s credibility. In fact, the best 
practice to prevent discovery of draft reports is not to create draft reports in the first place. 
 
These mandatory disclosure requirements remain controversial. Attorneys and judges cannot 
agree on whether the requirements add unnecessary expense or whether they promote 
uniformity and fairness. At least one of those goals, uniformity, has not been realized. Rule 26 
provides that the disclosure requirements are mandatory unless a particular district court 
provides otherwise by order or local rule. Several district courts have elected not to adopt Rule 
26 and have written their own local rules in its place. Accordingly, instead of providing a 
uniform system of disclosing information, the amendments have led to a system of different 
rules for different districts. 
 
Disclosure Requirements Under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 
Lawyers and expert witnesses must also mind the rules regarding expert disclosures in criminal 
cases, which are different from those required in criminal cases. In criminal cases, pretrial 
expert disclosure is only triggered if the defendant requests it from the government. When this 
happens, the government must produce a written summary of any testimony that it intends to 
use during its case-in-chief at trial. The summary must describe the witness’s opinions, the 
bases and reasons for those opinions, and the witness’s qualifications. If the government 
complies and requests reciprocal disclosure, the defendant must also provide a summary of 
any expert testimony he intends to use at trial.  
 
Expert Witness Discovery 
Concerning expert witnesses, discovery is the process by which the opposing side finds out an 
expert’s opinions and underlying rationales. Caution is the by-word for expert witnesses at 
every step of the legal process.  
 
In general, everything that a expert witness creates or uses is discoverable. According to FRCP 
26, which applies to civil cases in federal court, everything the expert receives, reviews, relies, 
produces, and says about the case after being hired is subject to discovery by opposing 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.808  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel. That means everything: narrative versions of the case, comments to the press or law 
enforcement, hypothetical reconstructions, draft reports, and even notes can be demanded 
and used by the opposing party. A shrewd attorney can use an expert’s notebook — which 
contains “dry runs” at an opinion and other purely deliberative information — to call the 
witness’s testimony into question. The only exception, as discussed below, is when the expert 
is hired by the attorney purely on a consulting basis. 
 
Because all “data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinions” is 
admissible in federal court, experts should never destroy drafts, notes, recordings, or any other 
form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion (Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, 
Rule 26(a)). 
 
In legalese, an expert witness has no privilege. The principle of privilege exists to protect certain 
core societal relationships (attorney-client, husband-wife), but the expert witness’s relationship 
with clients is not among those protected. If the expert’s opinions will be presented in court, 
everything related to the expert’s opinion is discoverable.  
 
In fact, anything an expert carries into a deposition — sworn testimony given by a party or 
witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the parties before trial and outside of court — 
is subject to discovery. Attorneys have been known to request a search of someone’s attaché 
case to get at important materials. This sharp edge of discovery is why experts insist on being 
deposed away from their own workplace; if they did not, their entire files would be subject to 
discovery.  
 
The Consulting Expert Exception 
Although everything a expert witness receives, reviews, relies, produces, and says is generally 
discoverable, there is an exception of course: The rules of discovery generally protect 
communications between a consulting expert, the attorney, and the party from disclosure to 
adversaries.  
 
Specifically, the work of a consulting expert is generally not discoverable because it typically 
falls under the protection of the work product doctrine. To review, the work product doctrine 
prevents compelled disclosure of documents and tangible things prepared in anticipation of 
litigation. And because its protection extends to information prepared by or for a party or the 
party’s representative, including consultants, the work of a consulting expert is generally not 
discoverable. But otherwise protected materials may become discoverable through waiver, and 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.809 
the general test for waiver is whether the materials at issue have been disclosed in a manner 
inconsistent with keeping it from an adversary. 
 
The distinction between the protection afforded to consulting and testifying experts is 
something like this: when acting as “witnesses,” experts are bringing official information to 
the court and thus must disclose any contact with the case; when experts act as “consultants” 
or “associates” for attorneys or law enforcement, they are only assisting the attorney and do 
not have to disclose their involvement in the case. 
 
There is, of course, one trap for the unwary: Protection of work product performed by a 
consulting expert may be lost when a testifying expert reviews the work of a consulting expert. 
The rule is that if an expert will testify at trial, everything he does regarding the case must be 
turned over to the other side. If an expert works only as a consultant to the attorney, then his 
work product is not discoverable. But if a testifying  expert reviews the work of a consulting  
expert, then the work of the consultant expert will be discoverable. Just remember this: If you 
are hired to testify at trial, anything you used to form your opinion will be subject to review by 
the opposing party. This includes notes from other experts, documents received from the 
plaintiff or defendant, and any documents or notes from the attorney. Be sure to consult with 
the attorney before you review anything. If a document was given to you by someone other 
than the attorney, ask before you read it. Otherwise, you may inadvertently destroy the 
confidentiality or privilege of the material. 
 
Keeping Good Files 
The best way to protect the confidentiality of information is to keep good files. Dan Poynter 
reports that experts routinely “reduce their files to useful reports only” once they have been 
officially engaged as a witness for trial. No one is recommending that files be sanitized, 
Poynter adds, just updated. The difference may be subject to abuse, but it is simple: Any 
materials that serve as the basis for an expert’s opinion must be in the file. Notes, documents, 
or tests that serve as background or that represent unfruitful lines of investigation do not have 
to be included and probably should not be. The attorney trying the case doesn’t want an 
expert having to answer about dead ends or exploratory jaunts; a shrewd cross-examiner can 
turn a hastily scribbled hypothetical into just enough “reasonable doubt” to avert a conviction. 
So, in the best case scenario, an expert presents to the court an opinion and its basis — nothing 
more, nothing less.  
                                                 
7 Poynter, Dan.  The Expert Witness Handbook.  Santa Barbara: Para Publishing, 1997: p. 82. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.810  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Proposed Changes to Expert Witness Rules Related to Expert Witness Discovery 
Recently, the Judicial Conference of the United States’ Advisory Committee on Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedures proposed significant amendments to Rule 26. If adopted, the amendments 
would significantly change the discoverability of the data or information considered by a 
testifying expert. This section examines the proposals.  
 
Although almost everything a testifying expert says or writes is subject to discovery by 
opposing counsel under current law, the revisions would prohibit the discovery of draft expert 
reports and limit discovery of attorney-expert communications. More specifically, the 
amendments would, among other things, make the following three changes: 
• Communications between counsel and retained testifying experts would generally be 
protected from disclosure or discovery. This amendment would offer work product 
protections similar to those already available to consulting experts.  
• Draft reports and disclosures required by Rule 26(a)(2) of any testifying expert would no 
longer be discoverable.  
• Rule 26 reports produced by a testifying expert would only need to include the “facts or 
data considered” by the expert. Currently, Rule 26(a)(2) reads “data or other information 
considered,” which courts have interpreted to include everything communicated by 
counsel to the expert. Thus, the amendment emphasizes that experts should only include 
factual information in their reports.  
 
These amendments are expected to be adopted and become effective on Dec. 1, 2010, as 
amended. 
 
 



:


prepar a report
care consider should be given to the prepar of an expert report which
document your find and opinion for both side it put your reput on the line a
wellwritten report that lai out a strong case might even prompt an earli settlement
howev it also let the opposit see the strength and weak of your case and better
prepar them for your deposit and trial testimoni
keep the follow six tip in mind when prepar an expert report
be brief
avoid ambigu or inexact languag
avoid gener be specif
add chart or graph where appropri
refer your work
meticul check the report for accuraci and neat
an import problem in the prepar of report and account summari aris from
the deleg of task to subordin if the person give evid ha not had direct
knowledg or ha not examin the specif document or prepar the summari the expert
might be trap under the hearsai rule if task ar deleg it is import that the review
process entail comparison of all origin work document
it also is import to know the effect of other assumpt on the conclus or opinion
reach in the report it often is possibl to trap an expert into give altern opinion base
upon assumpt that had not been consid gener work paper and schedul
support the report should not show contradictori conclus as thei mai be produc in
court thi is not to advoc that work paper should be delet or amend subsequ
to prepar rather it is a caution that these paper should be prepar with the precept
that thei could ultim be submit to the court thu the work paper should be
appropri prepar
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2805
onc thei accept a case mani expert immedi start assembl a narr version of the
event thi detail summari of the fact of the case serv as the raw materi for render
an offici opinion it is import that the text be written with care and profession as
the discuss below outlin the text mai and probabl will have to be produc dure
discoveri addition a wellwritten narr help the attornei in prepar and execut
the case at trial
what to includ in an expert wit report
the requir for an expert report differ depend on whether a case is pend in
feder or state court feder rule of civil procedur 26a2 which appli to civil case in
feder court requir expert wit to prepar report and provid them to the oppos
parti although thi requir mai be waiv if direct by the court or agre to by the
principl parti involv the rule appli to expert who have been retain specif for a
given case and it includ employe of a parti if part of the employe duti involv give
expert testimoni a written report often call a rule 26 report must be produc for each
expert wit
convers some state court do not requir written expert report but mai requir anoth
form of mandatori disclosur unfortun the requir of all fifti state ar beyond
the scope of thi manual therefor expert should check with counsel prior to issu their
written report to make sure that the report will compli with ani applic standard or
requir under state law
consult with counsel
gener expert should coordin with counsel to ensur that their report compli with all
applic legal standard failur to compli could result in a disposit of a claim by
summari judgment or an order preclud an expert from testifi
gener includ onli what is necessari
if a written report is request includ onli what is necessari avoid gratuit and
unimport comment at a minimum an expert wit report should do the follow
identifi the reason for the report and provid the matter to be explor by the report
provid the expert witnesss observ and opinion includ the basi rational data
or other inform us to reach the opinion
list ani exhibit us as a summari of or in support of the provid opinion includ
all chart or graph
testifi as an expert wit law
2806 2011 fraud examin manual
state ani conclus the wit mai have reach base on the observ and
inform
provid all sourc includ individu articl sourc document and book that the
expert consult
cite specif test that support the expert conclus and list the standard or test
method us by the expert
rule 26 report and disclosur requir under the feder rule of civil procedur
as note abov expert report in all civil action in feder court must compli with rule 26 of
the feder rule of civil procedur rule 26 state that testifi expert must prepar a
written report and make certain disclosur about their opinion and support ground
specif the expert report which must be prepar and sign by the expert wit must
includ the follow
a complet statement of all expert opinion to be express and the basi and reason for
such opinion
the data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion
ani exhibit to be us as support for or as a summari of the opinion
the qualif of the expert wit
all public author by the expert in the preced 10 year
a list of all other case in which the expert ha testifi as an expert at trial or at
deposit within the preced four year
the expert compens for hi review and testimoni
the feder rule of civil procedur also impos time limit concern rule 26 report the
rule requir that the ident and report of the expert must be disclos at least 90 dai befor
trial but the disclosur of an expert whose testimoni is intend sole to contradict or rebut
anoth witnesss testimoni must be disclos within 30 dai after the other wit
disclosur addition an expert must supplement the written report or deposit
testimoni at least 30 dai befor trial if he becom awar that previou disclosur might
have been materi incomplet or incorrect
if a court find that an expert report fail to satisfi the rule 26 requir it mai strike the
expert design and prohibit the expert from testifi a sampl format for an expert
report is includ at the end of thi chapter
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2807
note that under the feder rule of civil procedur the expert wit must turn over
anyth he us in form hi opinion thu if an expert us privileg or confidenti
document those document must be given to the oppos parti
moreov draft report ar also discover therefor expert should never destroi draft
note record or ani other form of document us to form the expert opinion ani
action to do so mai result in perman loss of the expert credibl in fact the best
practic to prevent discoveri of draft report is not to creat draft report in the first place
these mandatori disclosur requir remain controversi attornei and judg cannot
agre on whether the requir add unnecessari expens or whether thei promot
uniform and fair at least on of those goal uniform ha not been realiz rule 26
provid that the disclosur requir ar mandatori unless a particular district court
provid otherwis by order or local rule sever district court have elect not to adopt rule
26 and have written their own local rule in it place accordingli instead of provid a
uniform system of disclos inform the amend have led to a system of differ
rule for differ district
disclosur requir under the feder rule of crimin procedur
lawyer and expert wit must also mind the rule regard expert disclosur in crimin
case which ar differ from those requir in crimin case in crimin case pretrial
expert disclosur is onli trigger if the defend request it from the govern when thi
happen the govern must produc a written summari of ani testimoni that it intend to
us dure it caseinchief at trial the summari must describ the witnesss opinion the
base and reason for those opinion and the witnesss qualif if the govern
compli and request reciproc disclosur the defend must also provid a summari of
ani expert testimoni he intend to us at trial
expert wit discoveri
concern expert wit discoveri is the process by which the oppos side find out an
expert opinion and underli rational caution is the byword for expert wit at
everi step of the legal process
in gener everyth that a expert wit creat or us is discover accord to frcp
26 which appli to civil case in feder court everyth the expert receiv review reli
produc and sai about the case after be hire is subject to discoveri by oppos
testifi as an expert wit law
2808 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel that mean everyth narr version of the case comment to the press or law
enforc hypothet reconstruct draft report and even note can be demand
and us by the oppos parti a shrewd attornei can us an expert notebook which
contain dry run at an opinion and other pure delib inform to call the
witnesss testimoni into question the onli except as discuss below is when the expert
is hire by the attornei pure on a consult basi
becaus all data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion is
admiss in feder court expert should never destroi draft note record or ani other
form of document us to form the expert opinion feder rule of civil procedur
rule 26a
in legales an expert wit ha no privileg the principl of privileg exist to protect certain
core societ relationship attorneycli husbandwif but the expert witnesss relationship
with client is not among those protect if the expert opinion will be present in court
everyth relat to the expert opinion is discover
in fact anyth an expert carri into a deposit sworn testimoni given by a parti or
wit upon question by counsel for on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court
is subject to discoveri attornei have been known to request a search of someon attach
case to get at import materi thi sharp edg of discoveri is why expert insist on be
depos awai from their own workplac if thei did not their entir file would be subject to
discoveri
the consult expert except
although everyth a expert wit receiv review reli produc and sai is gener
discover there is an except of cours the rule of discoveri gener protect
commun between a consult expert the attornei and the parti from disclosur to
adversari
specif the work of a consult expert is gener not discover becaus it typic
fall under the protect of the work product doctrin to review the work product doctrin
prevent compel disclosur of document and tangibl thing prepar in anticip of
litig and becaus it protect extend to inform prepar by or for a parti or the
parti repres includ consult the work of a consult expert is gener not
discover but otherwis protect materi mai becom discover through waiver and
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2809
the gener test for waiver is whether the materi at issu have been disclos in a manner
inconsist with keep it from an adversari
the distinct between the protect afford to consult and testifi expert is
someth like thi when act as wit expert ar bring offici inform to
the court and thu must disclos ani contact with the case when expert act as consult
or associ for attornei or law enforc thei ar onli assist the attornei and do
not have to disclos their involv in the case
there is of cours on trap for the unwari protect of work product perform by a
consult expert mai be lost when a testifi expert review the work of a consult expert
the rule is that if an expert will testifi at trial everyth he doe regard the case must be
turn over to the other side if an expert work onli as a consult to the attornei then hi
work product is not discover but if a testifi expert review the work of a consult
expert then the work of the consult expert will be discover just rememb thi if you
ar hire to testifi at trial anyth you us to form your opinion will be subject to review by
the oppos parti thi includ note from other expert document receiv from the
plaintiff or defend and ani document or note from the attornei be sure to consult with
the attornei befor you review anyth if a document wa given to you by someon other
than the attornei ask befor you read it otherwis you mai inadvert destroi the
confidenti or privileg of the materi
keep good file
the best wai to protect the confidenti of inform is to keep good file dan poynter
report that expert routin reduc their file to us report onli onc thei have been
offici engag as a wit for trial no on is recommend that file be sanit
poynter add just updat the differ mai be subject to abus but it is simpl ani
materi that serv as the basi for an expert opinion must be in the file note document
or test that serv as background or that repres unfruit line of investig do not have
to be includ and probabl should not be the attornei try the case doesnt want an
expert have to answer about dead end or exploratori jaunt a shrewd crossexamin can
turn a hastili scribbl hypothet into just enough reason doubt to avert a convict
so in the best case scenario an expert present to the court an opinion and it basi noth
more noth less
7 poynter dan the expert wit handbook santa barbara para publish 1997 p 82
testifi as an expert wit law
2810 2011 fraud examin manual
propos chang to expert wit rule relat to expert wit discoveri
recent the judici confer of the unit state advisori committe on feder rule
of civil procedur propos signific amend to rule 26 if adopt the amend
would significantli chang the discover of the data or inform consid by a
testifi expert thi section examin the propos
although almost everyth a testifi expert sai or write is subject to discoveri by
oppos counsel under current law the revis would prohibit the discoveri of draft expert
report and limit discoveri of attorneyexpert commun more specif the
amend would among other thing make the follow three chang
commun between counsel and retain testifi expert would gener be
protect from disclosur or discoveri thi amend would offer work product
protect similar to those alreadi avail to consult expert
draft report and disclosur requir by rule 26a2 of ani testifi expert would no
longer be discover
rule 26 report produc by a testifi expert would onli need to includ the fact or
data consid by the expert current rule 26a2 read data or other inform
consid which court have interpret to includ everyth commun by
counsel to the expert thu the amend emphas that expert should onli includ
factual inform in their report
these amend ar expect to be adopt and becom effect on dec 1 2010 as
amend
