2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing a Report/Keeping Good Files


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Keeping Good Files 
The best way to protect the confidentiality of information is to keep good files. Dan Poynter 
reports that experts routinely “reduce their files to useful reports only” once they have been 
officially engaged as a witness for trial. No one is recommending that files be sanitized, 
Poynter adds, just updated. The difference may be subject to abuse, but it is simple: Any 
materials that serve as the basis for an expert’s opinion must be in the file. Notes, documents, 
or tests that serve as background or that represent unfruitful lines of investigation do not have 
to be included and probably should not be. The attorney trying the case doesn’t want an 
expert having to answer about dead ends or exploratory jaunts; a shrewd cross-examiner can 
turn a hastily scribbled hypothetical into just enough “reasonable doubt” to avert a conviction. 
So, in the best case scenario, an expert presents to the court an opinion and its basis — nothing 
more, nothing less.  
                                                 
7 Poynter, Dan.  The Expert Witness Handbook.  Santa Barbara: Para Publishing, 1997: p. 82. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.810  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


keep good file
the best wai to protect the confidenti of inform is to keep good file dan poynter
report that expert routin reduc their file to us report onli onc thei have been
offici engag as a wit for trial no on is recommend that file be sanit
poynter add just updat the differ mai be subject to abus but it is simpl ani
materi that serv as the basi for an expert opinion must be in the file note document
or test that serv as background or that repres unfruit line of investig do not have
to be includ and probabl should not be the attornei try the case doesnt want an
expert have to answer about dead end or exploratori jaunt a shrewd crossexamin can
turn a hastili scribbl hypothet into just enough reason doubt to avert a convict
so in the best case scenario an expert present to the court an opinion and it basi noth
more noth less
7 poynter dan the expert wit handbook santa barbara para publish 1997 p 82
testifi as an expert wit law
2810 2011 fraud examin manual
