2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness 
Just what constitutes expert status? Generally, the term expert witness refers to someone 
whose education and professional credentials establish their knowledge of a particular set of 
practices. As with introducing exhibits in trial, counsel must lay a foundation for the expert’s 
testimony. This means showing that by formal education, advanced study, or experience, the 
witness is sufficiently knowledgeable on the subject at hand. That is, a witness must be 
qualified to testify as an expert. The foundation may be established during the pre-trial stage 
or during direct examination.  
 
Unfortunately, it is becoming increasingly difficult to testify in federal courts as an expert and 
to understand the standards and rules to qualify as an expert. 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.811 
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the admissibility of expert testimony in 
federal court. Rule 702 provides that a witness qualified as an expert by “knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education” may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise to 
“scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge” if such testimony will “assist the trier of 
fact to understand the evidence or to determine the fact in issue.” 
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 509 U.S. 579 (1993), the Supreme Court stated that 
judges should act as “gatekeepers” and keep out scientific testimony that is not based on the 
methods of science. In a related case titled Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999),  
the Supreme Court stated that the judge’s gate-keeping function applies not just in cases 
dealing with scientific evidence, but in any case involving testimony based on “technical” and 
“other specialized knowledge.”Taken together, these cases mean that expert testimony given 
by Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, or other experts must be judged against the 
standards set forth by the Supreme Court in the Daubert case.  
 
In response to these cases, Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence was modified to 
specifically include the standards set forth by the Supreme Court in Daubert and Kumho Tire. 
Rule 702 now reads: 
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the 
evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) 
the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable 
principles and methods, and (3) the witness has ap plied the principles and methods reliably to the 
facts of the case. 
 
Simply put, Rule 702 provides that the judge must make three determinations before allowing 
an expert to testify before the jury:  
• Is the person qualified as an expert witness?  
• Will the expertise of the witness assist the jury in understanding the evidence or 
determining a fact at issue? In other words, is  the testimony relevant to the facts of the 
case? 
• Is the testimony reliable? 
 
Qualifications 
Before admitting expert testimony, the judge must determine that the expert is a qualified 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.812  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
practitioner. This element addresses whether the individual is qualified to assist the trier of 
fact. For a witness to qualify as an expert, counsel must establish that the witness is sufficiently 
knowledgeable on the subject at hand by showing formal education, skill, or experience. The 
determination of whether a witness is qualified as an expert or whether expert testimony is 
needed is left to the discretion of the trial judge.  
 
The process of evaluating whether an expert is qualified mainly centers on the candidate’s 
formal education and work experience — whether that includes 30 years in law enforcement or 
10 years in a large accounting firm. But there is no particular educational requirement for 
expert testimony; a witness with no formal education may be qualified based on training or 
experience. Some other factors that may be considered include the candidate’s: 
• Awards and honors 
• Licensing or certification 
• Technical training 
• Published books and journal articles 
• Positions in professional associations, societies, and organizations 
 
In addition to being qualified as an expert, the expert’s qualifications must be relevant to the 
particular issue(s) in the case at hand. But the important thing to remember is that a person 
can be qualified as an expert based on either special training or experience. A person does not 
have to be a CFE to testify as an expert on fraud detection techniques if that person has 
sufficient practical experience in those techniques. The CFE designation is important because 
it serves as a recognition of the special skills that those holding the designation have 
demonstrated to become a CFE. 
 
Although designations are important, it is most helpful to have prior experience as an expert 
with litigation or criminal matters. This is primarily because of what is learned during the 
experience of testifying. Further, it often is helpful to have been accepted as an expert in other 
cases thereby easing current acceptance. A danger exists, however, of appearing to be a 
“professional witness.” 
 
The counsel introducing the witness often will read the expert’s qualifications or ask specific 
questions to establish the witness’s credentials. Smart defense lawyers are not likely to 
challenge the credentials of experts, assuming they meet at least minimum standards of 
professional competence. To do so may give these experts an opportunity to fully highlight 
their professional credentials and perhaps make a greater impression on the jury or judge, thus 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.813 
adding more weight to their testimony. Although the expert’s qualifications are not often 
contested, it does happen. Beyond being accepted by both parties, the expert witness most 
importantly must be accepted by the court. 
 
Testimony 
After determining that a witness is a qualified expert, the trial judge must determine that the 
testimony offered by the expert is relevant to the facts of the case and reliable. These two 
questions focus on what opinions the expert will actually testify to in court.  
 
Relevant testimony will assist the jury in understanding the evidence or determining a fact at 
issue. To be relevant, the proposed testimony must be “sufficiently tied to the facts of the case 
that it will aid the jury in resolving a factual dispute.” Specifically, the court must determine 
whether the expert’s opinion has any tenden cy to make the existence of any fact more 
probable than it would be without the evidence. Testimony is not relevant if the jury can make 
its own determination without expert testimony. 
 
To be reliable, the testimony must be based on sufficient facts and data, and it must be the 
product of reliable methodology that has been reliably applied  to the facts of the case. This 
assures that an expert’s opinions are not mere speculation.  
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the Supreme Court set forth the following non-exclusive 
list of factors to assess reliability: 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique can be or has been tested 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and 
publication 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique enjoys general acceptance within the relevant 
scientific community 
• Whether there are standards governing the method used by the expert 
• Whether the expert’s technique has a high error rate 
 
Accordingly, CFEs should be sure to fully cover the rationale for their assumptions and 
determine whether the assumptions are supported by the facts presented during discovery. In 
fact, courts often find that assumptions not supported by evidence render expert opinions 
insufficient, thus causing the judge to exclude the expert’s testimony. For example, in Target 
Market Publishing, Inc. v. ADVO, Inc., a breach of contract case arising from a joint venture to 
produce advertising publications, a well-qualified accountant and business appraiser concluded 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.814  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that, had the defendant performed its contractual obligations, the joint venture would have 
earned $1.4 million in profits. To reach this conclusion, the expert assumed the joint venture 
would have successfully entered 49 marketing zones at the time of the breach. But the joint 
venture had only entered into two marketing zones and was unprofitable in both. The 
appellate court affirmed the exclusion of the expert’s opinion as to the value of a contract 
because the methodology underlying the opinion was based upon subjective belief and 
speculation, including unsupported assumptions.  
 
When preparing an expert report or testimony, examiners should keep in mind the Daubert 
factors set forth above. Examiners should document their conclusions, how they reached 
those conclusions, what evidence they based the conclusions on, and what professional 
techniques or knowledge they used. It would also be a good idea to keep a list of professional 
books or journals that advocate or sanction whatever principles were used in drawing the 
conclusions. 
 
Daubert Challenges 
A Daubert challenge is a motion raised, either before or during trial, to exclude an expert 
witness from presenting evidence. This motion is used to exclude the testimony of an expert 
who lacks sufficient expertise or uses questionable methods. 
 
Basis of Expert Testimony 
Rule 703 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the sources on which experts may base 
their testimony. It provides that experts may rely on facts or data made known to the expert at 
or before the hearing: 
 
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may 
be those perceived by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing. If of a type reasonably 
relied upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject, the 
facts or data need not be admissible in evidence in order for the opinion or inference to be 
admitted.  
 
Therefore, under Rule 703, an expert may base an opinion on:  
• Firsthand observations 
• Facts, data, or opinions presented at trial 
• Facts, data, or opinions conveyed outside of court  
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.815 
In addition, under Rule 703, experts can rely on inadmissible hearsay or other inadmissible 
evidence as long as it is the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field — a 
determination that is left to the discretion of the trial judge. This rule allows an expert to 
employ data usually used by experts in the field, though the data itself may not be admissible. 
An example might be a table of interest rates taken from a Department of Commerce 
publication. Similarly, an accountant serving as an expert witness may rely on private sources 
in forming an opinion if such sources normally are relied upon by accountants.  
 
The majority of states, however, follow the common law rule, which permits a more limited 
basis for expert testimony. Most states require the expert to predicate testimony on firsthand 
perception, or in the alternative, information “admitted in evidence at the hearing” at which 
he is called to testify. 
 
 



:


qualifi to testifi as an expert wit
just what constitut expert statu gener the term expert wit refer to someon
whose educ and profession credenti establish their knowledg of a particular set of
practic as with introduc exhibit in trial counsel must lai a foundat for the expert
testimoni thi mean show that by formal educ advanc studi or experi the
wit is suffici knowledg on the subject at hand that is a wit must be
qualifi to testifi as an expert the foundat mai be establish dure the pretrial stage
or dure direct examin
unfortun it is becom increasingli difficult to testifi in feder court as an expert and
to understand the standard and rule to qualifi as an expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2811
rule 702 of the feder rule of evid govern the admiss of expert testimoni in
feder court rule 702 provid that a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi in the form of an opinion or otherwis to
scientif technic or other special knowledg if such testimoni will assist the trier of
fact to understand the evid or to determin the fact in issu
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut 509 us 579 1993 the suprem court state that
judg should act as gatekeep and keep out scientif testimoni that is not base on the
method of scienc in a relat case titl kumho tire co v carmichael 526 us 137 1999
the suprem court state that the judg gatekeep function appli not just in case
deal with scientif evid but in ani case involv testimoni base on technic and
other special knowledgetaken togeth these case mean that expert testimoni given
by certifi fraud examin account or other expert must be judg against the
standard set forth by the suprem court in the daubert case
in respons to these case rule 702 of the feder rule of evid wa modifi to
specif includ the standard set forth by the suprem court in daubert and kumho tire
rule 702 now read
if scientif technic or other special knowledg will assist the trier of fact to understand the
evid or to determin a fact in issu a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwis if 1
the testimoni is base upon suffici fact or data 2 the testimoni is the product of reliabl
principl and method and 3 the wit ha ap pli the principl and method reliabl to the
fact of the case
simpli put rule 702 provid that the judg must make three determin befor allow
an expert to testifi befor the juri
is the person qualifi as an expert wit
will the expertis of the wit assist the juri in understand the evid or
determin a fact at issu in other word is the testimoni relev to the fact of the
case
is the testimoni reliabl
qualif
befor admit expert testimoni the judg must determin that the expert is a qualifi
testifi as an expert wit law
2812 2011 fraud examin manual
practition thi element address whether the individu is qualifi to assist the trier of
fact for a wit to qualifi as an expert counsel must establish that the wit is suffici
knowledg on the subject at hand by show formal educ skill or experi the
determin of whether a wit is qualifi as an expert or whether expert testimoni is
need is left to the discret of the trial judg
the process of evalu whether an expert is qualifi mainli center on the candid
formal educ and work experi whether that includ 30 year in law enforc or
10 year in a larg account firm but there is no particular educ requir for
expert testimoni a wit with no formal educ mai be qualifi base on train or
experi some other factor that mai be consid includ the candid
award and honor
licens or certif
technic train
publish book and journal articl
posit in profession associ societi and organ
in addit to be qualifi as an expert the expert qualif must be relev to the
particular issu in the case at hand but the import thing to rememb is that a person
can be qualifi as an expert base on either special train or experi a person doe not
have to be a cfe to testifi as an expert on fraud detect techniqu if that person ha
suffici practic experi in those techniqu the cfe design is import becaus
it serv as a recognit of the special skill that those hold the design have
demonstr to becom a cfe
although design ar import it is most help to have prior experi as an expert
with litig or crimin matter thi is primarili becaus of what is learn dure the
experi of testifi further it often is help to have been accept as an expert in other
case therebi eas current accept a danger exist howev of appear to be a
profession wit
the counsel introduc the wit often will read the expert qualif or ask specif
question to establish the witnesss credenti smart defens lawyer ar not like to
challeng the credenti of expert assum thei meet at least minimum standard of
profession compet to do so mai give these expert an opportun to fulli highlight
their profession credenti and perhap make a greater impress on the juri or judg thu
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2813
ad more weight to their testimoni although the expert qualif ar not often
contest it doe happen beyond be accept by both parti the expert wit most
importantli must be accept by the court
testimoni
after determin that a wit is a qualifi expert the trial judg must determin that the
testimoni offer by the expert is relev to the fact of the case and reliabl these two
question focu on what opinion the expert will actual testifi to in court
relev testimoni will assist the juri in understand the evid or determin a fact at
issu to be relev the propos testimoni must be suffici ti to the fact of the case
that it will aid the juri in resolv a factual disput specif the court must determin
whether the expert opinion ha ani tenden cy to make the exist of ani fact more
probabl than it would be without the evid testimoni is not relev if the juri can make
it own determin without expert testimoni
to be reliabl the testimoni must be base on suffici fact and data and it must be the
product of reliabl methodolog that ha been reliabl appli to the fact of the case thi
assur that an expert opinion ar not mere specul
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut inc the suprem court set forth the follow nonexclus
list of factor to assess reliabl
whether the expert theori or techniqu can be or ha been test
whether the expert theori or techniqu ha been subject to peer review and
public
whether the expert theori or techniqu enjoi gener accept within the relev
scientif commun
whether there ar standard govern the method us by the expert
whether the expert techniqu ha a high error rate
accordingli cfe should be sure to fulli cover the rational for their assumpt and
determin whether the assumpt ar support by the fact present dure discoveri in
fact court often find that assumpt not support by evid render expert opinion
insuffici thu caus the judg to exclud the expert testimoni for exampl in target
market publish inc v advo inc a breach of contract case aris from a joint ventur to
produc advertis public a wellqualifi account and busi apprais conclud
testifi as an expert wit law
2814 2011 fraud examin manual
that had the defend perform it contractu oblig the joint ventur would have
earn 14 million in profit to reach thi conclus the expert assum the joint ventur
would have successfulli enter 49 market zone at the time of the breach but the joint
ventur had onli enter into two market zone and wa unprofit in both the
appel court affirm the exclus of the expert opinion as to the valu of a contract
becaus the methodolog underli the opinion wa base upon subject belief and
specul includ unsupport assumpt
when prepar an expert report or testimoni examin should keep in mind the daubert
factor set forth abov examin should document their conclus how thei reach
those conclus what evid thei base the conclus on and what profession
techniqu or knowledg thei us it would also be a good idea to keep a list of profession
book or journal that advoc or sanction whatev principl were us in draw the
conclus
daubert challeng
a daubert challeng is a motion rais either befor or dure trial to exclud an expert
wit from present evid thi motion is us to exclud the testimoni of an expert
who lack suffici expertis or us question method
basi of expert testimoni
rule 703 of the feder rule of evid govern the sourc on which expert mai base
their testimoni it provid that expert mai reli on fact or data made known to the expert at
or befor the hear
the fact or data in the particular case upon which an expert base an opinion or infer mai
be those perceiv by or made known to the expert at or befor the hear if of a type reason
reli upon by expert in the particular field in form opinion or infer upon the subject the
fact or data need not be admiss in evid in order for the opinion or infer to be
admit
therefor under rule 703 an expert mai base an opinion on
firsthand observ
fact data or opinion present at trial
fact data or opinion convei outsid of court
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2815
in addit under rule 703 expert can reli on inadmiss hearsai or other inadmiss
evid as long as it is the type reason reli upon by expert in the particular field a
determin that is left to the discret of the trial judg thi rule allow an expert to
emploi data usual us by expert in the field though the data itself mai not be admiss
an exampl might be a tabl of interest rate taken from a depart of commerc
public similarli an account serv as an expert wit mai reli on privat sourc
in form an opinion if such sourc normal ar reli upon by account
the major of state howev follow the common law rule which permit a more limit
basi for expert testimoni most state requir the expert to predic testimoni on firsthand
percept or in the altern inform admit in evid at the hear at which
he is call to testifi
