2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing to Testify


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Preparing to Testify 
The majority of cases filed will not go to trial. They will be resolved through either a 
settlement agreement or a plea bargain. Therefore, most experts’ experience in testifying 
comes through having their depositions taken.  
 
Depositions of Expert Witnesses 
A deposition is sworn testimony given by a party or witness upon questioning by counsel for 
one of the parties before trial and outside of court. A deposition serves as a powerful 
discovery device that may be used to compel anyone associated with the case to give oral 
testimony under oath. Although you cannot decline to testify, an expert may be allowed to 
specify a convenient time and place.  
 
Sometimes the party requesting the deposition pays the opposing expert’s fee — which consists 
of the time spent giving the deposition at his standard hourly rate or in half-day or full-day 
increments, plus travel time. This usually occurs in federal court. Most state courts require 
each side to pay the expenses of the expert’s they hire. An expert charges his client for the 
time spent preparing for deposition and for testifying. 
 
In addition to the required court reporter, the proceeding may be recorded by a camera or a 
voice recorder. A judge is not present during this question-and-answer session. For skilled 
investigators, deposition provides a golden opportunity to hear the other side’s case aloud. 
The opposition may set ulterior goals as well, including: 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.816  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To learn new information or confirm existing facts 
• To appraise the expert’s ability as a witness 
• To lock the expert into a hard-to-defend position 
• To create a written record for future impeachment 
 
Before testifying at a deposition or at trial, the expert should ensure that required graphic 
displays are ready and available, that all important discussions with the lawyer have been held, 
and that the expert has a complete understanding of the report and other relevant issues. The 
expert should ensure that he has agreement with counsel as to the sequence of evidence and 
the strategy for presenting it. It often is useful to have a “dry run” at the direct testimony, with 
all the questions posed by the counsel to the expert, to avoid surprises during trial. 
 
At pre-testimony meetings, it is appropriate to discuss the qualifications of the witness again 
to ensure that they are current, to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the case, and to 
discuss and agree on what parts of the expert’s reports, if any, are to be entered as exhibits. 
 
Appearance 
The appearance of the expert witness often lends itself to an assessment of the credibility of 
that witness. It is recommended that the witness wear conservative business attire, be well-groomed, 
and neatly dressed.  
 
It is also important that the witness maintain a professional demeanor. In the witness box, the 
witness should maintain a poised, alert appearance, stand firmly, and be ready to take the oath. 
The witness should not smile gratuitously at the judge, jury, or the lawyers. Also, it is 
important that the witness keep control of his hands, to avoid fidgeting. And witness should 
maintain eye contact with the questioner as much as possible; he should not stare off into 
space, at the floor, or at the ceiling. 
 
As the judge will be taking notes, the witness should speak slowly to ensure that the judge 
does not fall behind. The answers should be directed to the questioner. The witness’s voice 
should be strong, clear, and audible. Thus, before answering each question, the witness should 
pause before answering and carefully consider the answer; he should also respond in a slow 
and deliberate manner. 
 
Do's and Don'ts 
There are other considerations in making an expert a credible witness. Some tips are: 
• Exude an alert and confident attitude. 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.817 
• Maintain professional pride and integrity throughout. 
• Tell the truth; be honest and avoid bias. 
• Use simple rather than complex terms, and refrain from using professional jargon. 
• Explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms. 
• Be friendly and polite to all parties present. 
• Be alert.  
• Correct any misstatements as soon as they are detected. 
• Listen carefully and answer the specific questions—do not go off on tangents or volunteer 
more than the question requires. 
• Do not verbally fence with the attorney. 
• Do not try to be humorous or hip. 
• Be calm and deliberate in responding to questions—think before you speak. 
• Plan your testimony in advance and know your material thoroughly.  
• Use graphs, charts, and other visual aids if they help to clarify a point. 
• Do not read from notes if you can avoid it (the opposition lawyer will probably demand to 
see such notes, and the witness will then look like he rehearsed his testimony). 
• Prepare your material completely. If you have documents to introduce, have them 
organized so that you can quickly retrieve them when asked to do so. 
• Do not “hem and haw” or stammer; recover your composure when a tough or complex 
question is posed. 
• Ask for a question to be repeated or clarified if not fully comprehended. 
• If an answer is not known, say so; do not guess. 
• Do not invent and do not inflate. 
• In cross-examination, do not respond too quickly because counsel might wish to object to 
the question. 
• Do not be evasive. 
 
Several other things should also be avoided. These range from drinking five cups of coffee 
immediately prior to testimony or chewing bubble gum while giving evidence, to small 
physical mannerisms that might affect your appearance. These physical mannerisms, which 
might be as simple as rubbing one’s hands together continually, looking down at one’s hands, 
fidgeting on the stand, or jingling coins in a pocket, could become irritating to the judge and 
jury. 
 
Similar to trial proceedings, the opposition commonly drills an expert about his credentials, his 
methodology, and his conclusions pertaining to the case. Unlike in a trial, the expert quite 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.818  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
often answers tersely, giving only a straight “yes” or “no.” For inquiries that require more, you 
should respond directly and precisely and refrain from volunteering any information. It is not 
your duty to educate the other side at deposition. You may ask for a recess or a break if 
needed. 
 
Pour over the written transcription of your deposition afterward to ensure accuracy, 
immediately correcting any omissions or errors, whether made by you or the stenographer. 
Notify your lawyer if your opinion has changed since deposition. If you are present at the 
deposition of the opposing expert, you may be asked to summarize your impressions 
afterward and note any gray areas that call for further lines of inquiry. 
 
 



:


prepar to testifi
the major of case file will not go to trial thei will be resolv through either a
settlement agreement or a plea bargain therefor most expert experi in testifi
come through have their deposit taken
deposit of expert wit
a deposit is sworn testimoni given by a parti or wit upon question by counsel for
on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court a deposit serv as a power
discoveri devic that mai be us to compel anyon associ with the case to give oral
testimoni under oath although you cannot declin to testifi an expert mai be allow to
specifi a conveni time and place
sometim the parti request the deposit pai the oppos expert fee which consist
of the time spent give the deposit at hi standard hourli rate or in halfdai or fulldai
increment plu travel time thi usual occur in feder court most state court requir
each side to pai the expens of the expert thei hire an expert charg hi client for the
time spent prepar for deposit and for testifi
in addit to the requir court report the proceed mai be record by a camera or a
voic record a judg is not present dure thi questionandansw session for skill
investig deposit provid a golden opportun to hear the other side case aloud
the opposit mai set ulterior goal as well includ
testifi as an expert wit law
2816 2011 fraud examin manual
to learn new inform or confirm exist fact
to apprais the expert abil as a wit
to lock the expert into a hardtodefend posit
to creat a written record for futur impeach
befor testifi at a deposit or at trial the expert should ensur that requir graphic
displai ar readi and avail that all import discuss with the lawyer have been held
and that the expert ha a complet understand of the report and other relev issu the
expert should ensur that he ha agreement with counsel as to the sequenc of evid and
the strategi for present it it often is us to have a dry run at the direct testimoni with
all the question pose by the counsel to the expert to avoid surpris dure trial
at pretestimoni meet it is appropri to discuss the qualif of the wit again
to ensur that thei ar current to discuss the strength and weak of the case and to
discuss and agre on what part of the expert report if ani ar to be enter as exhibit
appear
the appear of the expert wit often lend itself to an assess of the credibl of
that wit it is recommend that the wit wear conserv busi attir be wellgroom
and neatli dress
it is also import that the wit maintain a profession demeanor in the wit box the
wit should maintain a pois alert appear stand firmli and be readi to take the oath
the wit should not smile gratuit at the judg juri or the lawyer also it is
import that the wit keep control of hi hand to avoid fidget and wit should
maintain ey contact with the question as much as possibl he should not stare off into
space at the floor or at the ceil
as the judg will be take note the wit should speak slowli to ensur that the judg
doe not fall behind the answer should be direct to the question the witnesss voic
should be strong clear and audibl thu befor answer each question the wit should
paus befor answer and carefulli consid the answer he should also respond in a slow
and deliber manner
do and dont
there ar other consider in make an expert a credibl wit some tip ar
exud an alert and confid attitud
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2817
maintain profession pride and integr throughout
tell the truth be honest and avoid bia
us simpl rather than complex term and refrain from us profession jargon
explain complex concept in a layperson term
be friendli and polit to all parti present
be alert
correct ani misstat as soon as thei ar detect
listen carefulli and answer the specif questionsdo not go off on tangent or volunt
more than the question requir
do not verbal fenc with the attornei
do not try to be humor or hip
be calm and deliber in respond to questionsthink befor you speak
plan your testimoni in advanc and know your materi thoroughli
us graph chart and other visual aid if thei help to clarifi a point
do not read from note if you can avoid it the opposit lawyer will probabl demand to
see such note and the wit will then look like he rehears hi testimoni
prepar your materi complet if you have document to introduc have them
organ so that you can quickli retriev them when ask to do so
do not hem and haw or stammer recov your composur when a tough or complex
question is pose
ask for a question to be repeat or clarifi if not fulli comprehend
if an answer is not known sai so do not guess
do not invent and do not inflat
in crossexamin do not respond too quickli becaus counsel might wish to object to
the question
do not be evas
sever other thing should also be avoid these rang from drink five cup of coffe
immedi prior to testimoni or chew bubbl gum while give evid to small
physic manner that might affect your appear these physic manner which
might be as simpl as rub on hand togeth continu look down at on hand
fidget on the stand or jingl coin in a pocket could becom irrit to the judg and
juri
similar to trial proceed the opposit commonli drill an expert about hi credenti hi
methodolog and hi conclus pertain to the case unlik in a trial the expert quit
testifi as an expert wit law
2818 2011 fraud examin manual
often answer ters give onli a straight ye or no for inquiri that requir more you
should respond directli and precis and refrain from volunt ani inform it is not
your duti to educ the other side at deposit you mai ask for a recess or a break if
need
pour over the written transcript of your deposit afterward to ensur accuraci
immedi correct ani omiss or error whether made by you or the stenograph
notifi your lawyer if your opinion ha chang sinc deposit if you ar present at the
deposit of the oppos expert you mai be ask to summar your impress
afterward and note ani grai area that call for further line of inquiri
