2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Direct Examination


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Direct Examination  
Direct examinations are conducted by the attorney who retained the expert. Because experts 
are hired for their opinions, they are not subject to the usual restrictions about statements of 
judgment. Experts also have other leeway not given to ordinary witnesses. They may rely on 
documents or exchanges that would otherwise be inadmissible as hearsay. This allows them to 
use articles, academic papers, professional texts, and consultations in rendering their opinions 
of the case. These materials are admissible as long as they were used by the expert in 
developing his opinion.  
 
Presenting Expert Testimony 
Expert witnesses present their findings in various ways such as narrative questions, 
hypotheticals, specialized materials, and special exhibits. Experts are commonly asked to 
answer narrative questions, which are all but forbidden to lay witnesses. Narrative questions are 
broad, open-ended questions that allow experts to present their opinions in their own words 
with minimal prompting from the lawyer. Fraud cases, with their divergent paths of activity 
and intrigue, can require complex summarizing in order for the facts to make any sense. The 
average group of jurors has never considered how someone could manipulate store 
inventories to drive up the company’s stock price and then make millions on the phony surge. 
The expert witness in cases like this often will begin testimony by recounting the narrative 
background of a case, the tests and experiments that were performed during the investigation, 
and a summary of the findings based on his professional expertise.  
 
Expert witnesses also are allowed to demonstrate their findings by using hypotheticals: fictional 
situations, analogous to the act in question, which clarify and highlight particular aspects of 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.819 
the dispute. But to be effective, hypotheticals must be constructed exquisitely. Appeals courts 
have been adamant that the facts of the case being tried have to be reflected directly in the 
hypothetical situation; there must be no exaggeration or obscuring in the presentation.  
 
Moreover, experts sometimes use specialized ma terials in reaching and communicating their 
opinions. Professional publications and sources of information that normally are used in the 
course of business may be produced as part of the trial. Federal rules require only that the 
source be “generally used and relied on” by people in that field.  
 
Finally, experts may use special exhibits to demonstrate facts about the case or some aspect of 
their opinion. These exhibits may include charts, diagrams, annotated documents, or photos. 
If the exhibit is offered to prove a fact, it must satisfy the rules applicable to any other piece of 
evidence in the case. In demonstrating a professional opinion, the role of the exhibit must be 
clear and its applicability to the present case justified, if necessary.  
 
Direct Testimony Considerations 
The purpose of direct examination is to enable counsel for the side you represent to draw out 
the evidence to prove the case. Most likely, this will only be a reiteration of what previously 
has been discussed with your counsel outside the courtroom. It is still very important, 
however, to refresh your memory beforehand by reference to anything you may have read, 
written, or given in evidence on the case. 
 
Direct examination is the most organized aspect of the trial; it is the stage in which the 
expert’s credibility must be established with the judge or jury. According to the concept of the 
primary memory, people remember best what they hear first and last. This often is a useful 
idea to employ in giving or structuring evidence. Another noteworthy point is that the jurors 
often have limited attention spans in a long trial; thus, it is often useful to use a 
“grab/give/conclude” method of presenting evidence. 
 
To a witness, the interpretation of questions and the ability to listen are crucial skills. Even 
though the witness might already have gone through a mock direct examination, it is critical 
that each question be carefully evaluated again — the witness should reflect upon the questions 
asked and not anticipate them (they might have been changed, anyway, since the time of 
rehearsal). 
 
The answers to all questions should be clear and concise, and, where complex terms are used, 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.820  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
they should be clarified. Similarly, explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms and avoid 
professional jargon because the fact finders might not be familiar with esoteric or technical 
terminology. 
 
Use of notes should be limited as much as possible to maintain eye contact. 
 
Schedules, if any, should be described accurately and succinctly in easily understood terms. 
Schedules are, by their nature, concise documents and should be described in that manner.  
 
If opinions are given, they should be stated with conviction. 
 
Certain standards for Certified Fraud Examiners are found in the Code of Professional Ethics 
(please see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual). 
Specifically, Certified Fraud Examiners are prohibited from expressing opinions as to the guilt 
or innocence of any person or party. This is not to say that the expert witness cannot testify to 
the badges, hallmarks, or characteristics of fraud found in the case. It also does not mean that 
the Certified Fraud Examiner cannot testify that, based on the evidence, he believes the 
accused might have committed the offense. However, the ultimate guilt or innocence of any 
person or party is the sole responsibility of the judge and jury. The Certified Fraud Examiner 
typically will not be permitted to testify to the ultimate fact questions. 
 
 



:


direct examin
direct examin ar conduct by the attornei who retain the expert becaus expert
ar hire for their opinion thei ar not subject to the usual restrict about statement of
judgment expert also have other leewai not given to ordinari wit thei mai reli on
document or exchang that would otherwis be inadmiss as hearsai thi allow them to
us articl academ paper profession text and consult in render their opinion
of the case these materi ar admiss as long as thei were us by the expert in
develop hi opinion
present expert testimoni
expert wit present their find in variou wai such as narr question
hypothet special materi and special exhibit expert ar commonli ask to
answer narr question which ar all but forbidden to lai wit narr question ar
broad openend question that allow expert to present their opinion in their own word
with minim prompt from the lawyer fraud case with their diverg path of activ
and intrigu can requir complex summar in order for the fact to make ani sens the
averag group of juror ha never consid how someon could manipul store
inventori to drive up the compani stock price and then make million on the phoni surg
the expert wit in case like thi often will begin testimoni by recount the narr
background of a case the test and experi that were perform dure the investig
and a summari of the find base on hi profession expertis
expert wit also ar allow to demonstr their find by us hypothet fiction
situat analog to the act in question which clarifi and highlight particular aspect of
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2819
the disput but to be effect hypothet must be construct exquisit appeal court
have been adam that the fact of the case be tri have to be reflect directli in the
hypothet situat there must be no exagger or obscur in the present
moreov expert sometim us special ma terial in reach and commun their
opinion profession public and sourc of inform that normal ar us in the
cours of busi mai be produc as part of the trial feder rule requir onli that the
sourc be gener us and reli on by peopl in that field
final expert mai us special exhibit to demonstr fact about the case or some aspect of
their opinion these exhibit mai includ chart diagram annot document or photo
if the exhibit is offer to prove a fact it must satisfi the rule applic to ani other piec of
evid in the case in demonstr a profession opinion the role of the exhibit must be
clear and it applic to the present case justifi if necessari
direct testimoni consider
the purpos of direct examin is to enabl counsel for the side you repres to draw out
the evid to prove the case most like thi will onli be a reiter of what previous
ha been discuss with your counsel outsid the courtroom it is still veri import
howev to refresh your memori beforehand by refer to anyth you mai have read
written or given in evid on the case
direct examin is the most organ aspect of the trial it is the stage in which the
expert credibl must be establish with the judg or juri accord to the concept of the
primari memori peopl rememb best what thei hear first and last thi often is a us
idea to emploi in give or structur evid anoth noteworthi point is that the juror
often have limit attent span in a long trial thu it is often us to us a
grabgiveconclud method of present evid
to a wit the interpret of question and the abil to listen ar crucial skill even
though the wit might alreadi have gone through a mock direct examin it is critic
that each question be carefulli evalu again the wit should reflect upon the question
ask and not anticip them thei might have been chang anywai sinc the time of
rehears
the answer to all question should be clear and concis and where complex term ar us
testifi as an expert wit law
2820 2011 fraud examin manual
thei should be clarifi similarli explain complex concept in a layperson term and avoid
profession jargon becaus the fact finder might not be familiar with esoter or technic
terminolog
us of note should be limit as much as possibl to maintain ey contact
schedul if ani should be describ accur and succinctli in easili understood term
schedul ar by their natur concis document and should be describ in that manner
if opinion ar given thei should be state with convict
certain standard for certifi fraud examin ar found in the code of profession ethic
pleas see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
specif certifi fraud examin ar prohibit from express opinion as to the guilt
or innoc of ani person or parti thi is not to sai that the expert wit cannot testifi to
the badg hallmark or characterist of fraud found in the case it also doe not mean that
the certifi fraud examin cannot testifi that base on the evid he believ the
accus might have commit the offens howev the ultim guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti is the sole respons of the judg and juri the certifi fraud examin
typic will not be permit to testifi to the ultim fact question
