2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Cross-Examination


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Cross-Examination 
Cross-examination is truly the highlight of the adversary court system. It is geared to allow 
counsel either to clarify or to make points at the witness’s expense. It generally is the most 
difficult part of the trial process for any witness. Anything can turn up that might refute or 
embarrass the witness. The witness’s credibility is constantly called into question. 
 
The goals of the opposing counsel during cross-examination are threefold. The first goal is to 
diminish the importance of the expert testimony just presented. The second goal is to have 
the expert testify in support of the opposing position by providing a series of assumptions. 
The third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequacies in the expert’s 
opinion, thereby discrediting the opinion, the report, and the witness. 
 
The opposing counsel can attack or question anything that has been said or entered into court. 
This includes notes, working papers, affidavits, will-says, reports, and preliminary trial or 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.821 
discovery transcripts. Often, cross-examination creates an atmosphere of confrontation and 
contradiction.  
 
The witness must not take attacks or attempts to discredit personally. There are many ways to 
discredit an expert witness. Throughout the process, it is important for the witness to maintain 
pride and professional integrity. An adage to remember is that “even mud can be worn well.” 
 
Opposing counsel wants to reduce or limit the impact of the witness’s evidence — it is natural 
to feel a certain amount of apprehension, and this might do a great deal to keep the witness 
alert. The jury often watches the judge, and thus the expert often can take a clue as to the 
tempo and reaction of the jury and the judge to the evidence being presented. Slight changes 
in style and presentation could be made accordingly. 
 
The opposing counsel usually has a plan of cross-examination in mind and an expert witness 
should be able to anticipate this direction to prevent falling into a trap. A danger to this, of 
course, is that the witness will spend as much time planning ahead as answering the questions, 
and might not be giving appropriate attention to the immediate questions. Further, in 
attempting to anticipate a question, the witness might misunderstand what is actually asked. 
 
Generally, it is a rule of thumb that a witness should not volunteer or freely give information.  
 
During the answer, it often might be extremely difficult to avoid getting trapped in various 
assumptions, “what if” scenarios, and generalities presented by counsel during cross-examination. 
If this occurs, or if asked a long or imprecise question, retrench by asking for a 
question to be rephrased in smaller components. 
 
It is critical never to underestimate the expertise of the opposing counsel. Often, opposing 
counsel will be underplaying its understanding of the issues to lull the expert into a sense of 
security. This can lead the expert into a difficult situation. Opposing counsel’s golden rule is to 
cross-examine only if it would benefit the case. In asking questions of the witness, opposing 
counsel generally either will ask short questions in plain words or will ask leading questions. 
Usually counsel knows the answers to the questions. 
   
The opposing counsel generally will evaluate answers and then take a specific approach that 
furthers the argument. Generally, the witness will not be allowed to explain or elaborate on 
the question as that would allow the witness to alter the thrust of a carefully orchestrated 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.822  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
cross-examination. Opposing counsel will continually question or evaluate how the last 
question and answer could be used against the witness. 
 
Furthermore, opposing counsel often will prepare by researching the expert. For example, it is 
likely that counsel will read all earlier testimony and publications of the witness. Opposing 
counsel also might speak to other lawyers as to the witness’s capabilities in court if the lawyers 
have had experience with the witness. If weaknesses are discovered, the questioning probably 
will be directed to that area. 
 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to take psychological control of a witness by: 
• Using physical presence to intimidate 
• Making nonstop eye contact 
• Challenging space of the witness 
• Asking questions at a fast pace to confuse the witness 
• Not allowing the expert to explain or deviate from the exact question 
 
Physical domination often is used by opposing counsel. Opposing counsel will quickly 
discover the response pattern of the expert and might take an aggressive stance to lead the 
expert to the point where he is unsure. 
 
Counsel may employ the following strategic methods to discredit a witness or to diminish the 
importance of a witness’s testimony. These methods could be used alone or in conjunction 
with one another and are not an all-encompassing list. A good counsel in cross-examination 
will quickly discover the witness’s weak areas and employ any possible techniques to achieve 
its goal. 
 
Myopic Vision 
Myopic vision entails getting the expert to admit to a great amount of time being spent in the 
investigation of a matter, then selecting an area to highlight about which the expert is unsure 
or has not done much work. This area might not be central to the issues in the case, but it 
must be relevant to the conclusions reached. Then the opposing counsel will make a large 
issue of it and prove that the expert’s vision is myopic in that the work was limited in extent 
or scope and, as such, substandard. At the same time, the matter of fees could be drawn in to 
show that large sums were expended to have this “obviously incomplete” work done. 
 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.823 
Safety 
This approach involves lulling the expert into a feeling of false security by not attacking him. 
After the expert feels secure, the opposing counsel might find a small hole in the expert’s 
testimony that can be enlarged quickly. This approach often is characterized by being friendly 
and conciliatory, by which the jury is made sympathetic to the cause of the opposing counsel. 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to achieve a certain amount of association with the 
witness that will make the witness want to help the opposing counsel to bring out 
information. Doing so may result in the witness giving information that otherwise would not 
have been given. With this additional information, it might be possible to find a chink or hole 
in the evidence and open it further. 
 
Contradiction 
Opposing counsel might use leading questions to force the witness into a hard or 
contradictory position. Alternately, counsel can establish the credibility in court of a 
potentially contradicting document or quote from other articles written by experts in the field. 
If these documents or articles are in contradiction to the expert, then an admission can be 
obtained from the expert as to that contradiction. If a contradiction exits, the expert might be 
drawn into an argument as to who is the most appropriate or experienced person. Instances 
also occur in which a witness has contradicted himself or his own article written several years 
prior merely because of his lack of memory or confusion due to the attack. 
 
New Information 
Opposing counsel may introduce new information of which the expert might not be aware. 
This normally is done to introduce confusion in the witness’s mind in the hope that the 
witness might contradict himself or develop a series of alternate scenarios given the new 
information to show that the existing report and opinions are no longer of value. 
 
Support Opposing Side’s Theory 
This approach recognizes an expert’s qualifications and evidence. The same information used 
by the expert is then interpreted by opposing counsel in a different fashion to support an 
alternate theory. By getting the expert to agree to the alternate interpretation of the facts and 
the alternate theory, the opposing counsel, in effect, has made the expert a witness for the 
other side. This technique is useful to obtain concessions from the witness that would damage 
his conclusions and, ultimately, his credibility. 
 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.824  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bias 
This method draws the expert’s counsel and the expert together to show possible collusion as 
to the evidence being presented, and hence to demonstrate bias. This can be shown if the 
opposing counsel can determine that the expert’s  counsel had instructed the witness as to 
what to say or by limiting the expert’s scope and thus his conclusions. This approach also can 
focus on the question of whether or not the expert was told by his client what to do and look 
for. With this approach, opposing counsel might attempt to show that the expert overlooked 
important documentation in an effort to assist his client. 
 
Confrontation 
This method involves the use of a confrontation of wills to put the witness into a situation in 
which he might lose emotional control and show anger. Once a witness has exploded, 
credibility normally disappears. 
 
Sounding Board 
This method uses the witness as a sounding board to reacquaint the jury with the favorable 
aspects (to opposing counsel) of the case. This technique often uses the “is it not true?” and 
“would you agree with me?” approach. Constant agreement is useful to browbeat the expert. 
In the eyes of the judge and jury, agreement with various questions raised by the opposing 
counsel also might be assumed to be a general concurrence with the position of the opposing 
counsel. 
 
Fees 
This method attacks the witness on the basis of taking an inordinate amount of time for the 
result given. The attack might indicate a lack of complete work and be correlated to the fee 
charged. This method often is related to “bias” and “myopic vision.” It might be suggested 
that the witness and his opinion are, in fact, biased. This technique often builds to a 
conclusion in which the opposing counsel arrives at the idea that the work was superficial and 
unprofessional, yet a great deal of money was received by the expert for this and other areas 
of service to the client. The inference is that the testimony was purchased or that the expert 
was paid to overlook facts contradictory to the conclusions reached. 
 
Terms of Engagement 
This technique normally is employed by obtaining the original engagement letter and 
examining the terms of engagement. Opposing counsel can then show that the expert 
intended to look only at various items in support of his client and glossed over alternative 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.825 
theories, generally to the detriment of the opposition. As such, the witness could be portrayed 
as partial.  
 
Discrediting the Witness 
Discrediting the witness is based on proving that the expert is unworthy to be a credible 
witness instructor to the court. This often can be accomplished by showing that the expert is 
currently or has previously been grossly biased, prejudiced, or corrupt; been convicted of 
criminal activities; been shown to engage in immoral activities; made inconsistent statements; 
acquired a reputation for a lack of veracity; or exaggerated his qualifications. Discrediting also 
could consist of looking at the quality of the expert’s educational background to reveal any 
other unusual activities that might bias the witness or exclude him from the court as an expert. 
 
Personal Attacks 
Another cross-examination tactic often used by attorneys is to “kill the messenger.” These 
attacks are of a more personal nature and generally include some of the following: 
• The witness is unqualified. 
• The witness displayed unprofessional behavior during the examination (such as asking 
personal or sexual questions during interviews). 
• The witness had a conflict of interest. 
• The witness was harassing (phone calls at home, threatening voice mails, etc.). 
 
Failure to Follow the Standards of the Profession 
Additionally, the attorney may attempt to discredit experts by trying to show that they failed to 
follow the standards, best practices, or professional conduct rules set forth by their profession, 
such as the ACFE for fraud examiners or other professional bodies such as the AICPA, the 
IIA, or state bar associations. 
 
For CFEs, it is extremely important to be familiar with the tools and techniques set forth in 
the Fraud Examiners Manual. There have been cases where enterprising defense attorneys have 
obtained copies of the Manual and quizzed the fraud examiner about whether or not the 
methods set forth in the Manual were followed. Likewise, attorneys will often question CFEs 
about the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics, particularly regarding the prohibition against 
stating an opinion of guilt or innocence (which is discussed below). 
 
It is important to understand that the Fraud Examiners Manual does not set forth standards. 
The Manual provides the CFE with information, suggestions, and methods for conducting a 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.826  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
fraud examination. A CFE is always required to follow the Code of Professional Ethics, but 
he is not required to follow what is set forth in the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
However, if a fraud examiner deviates from the normal investigative methods set forth in the 
Manual, he should have an explanation as to why it was appropriate and explain that the 
Manual is only provided as guidance. 
 
 



:


crossexamin
crossexamin is truli the highlight of the adversari court system it is gear to allow
counsel either to clarifi or to make point at the witnesss expens it gener is the most
difficult part of the trial process for ani wit anyth can turn up that might refut or
embarrass the wit the witnesss credibl is constantli call into question
the goal of the oppos counsel dure crossexamin ar threefold the first goal is to
diminish the import of the expert testimoni just present the second goal is to have
the expert testifi in support of the oppos posit by provid a seri of assumpt
the third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequaci in the expert
opinion therebi discredit the opinion the report and the wit
the oppos counsel can attack or question anyth that ha been said or enter into court
thi includ note work paper affidavit willsai report and preliminari trial or
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2821
discoveri transcript often crossexamin creat an atmospher of confront and
contradict
the wit must not take attack or attempt to discredit person there ar mani wai to
discredit an expert wit throughout the process it is import for the wit to maintain
pride and profession integr an adag to rememb is that even mud can be worn well
oppos counsel want to reduc or limit the impact of the witnesss evid it is natur
to feel a certain amount of apprehens and thi might do a great deal to keep the wit
alert the juri often watch the judg and thu the expert often can take a clue as to the
tempo and reaction of the juri and the judg to the evid be present slight chang
in style and present could be made accordingli
the oppos counsel usual ha a plan of crossexamin in mind and an expert wit
should be abl to anticip thi direct to prevent fall into a trap a danger to thi of
cours is that the wit will spend as much time plan ahead as answer the question
and might not be give appropri attent to the immedi question further in
attempt to anticip a question the wit might misunderstand what is actual ask
gener it is a rule of thumb that a wit should not volunt or freeli give inform
dure the answer it often might be extrem difficult to avoid get trap in variou
assumpt what if scenario and gener present by counsel dure crossexamin
if thi occur or if ask a long or imprecis question retrench by ask for a
question to be rephras in smaller compon
it is critic never to underestim the expertis of the oppos counsel often oppos
counsel will be underplai it understand of the issu to lull the expert into a sens of
secur thi can lead the expert into a difficult situat oppos counsel golden rule is to
crossexamin onli if it would benefit the case in ask question of the wit oppos
counsel gener either will ask short question in plain word or will ask lead question
usual counsel know the answer to the question
the oppos counsel gener will evalu answer and then take a specif approach that
further the argument gener the wit will not be allow to explain or elabor on
the question as that would allow the wit to alter the thrust of a carefulli orchestr
testifi as an expert wit law
2822 2011 fraud examin manual
crossexamin oppos counsel will continu question or evalu how the last
question and answer could be us against the wit
furthermor oppos counsel often will prepar by research the expert for exampl it is
like that counsel will read all earlier testimoni and public of the wit oppos
counsel also might speak to other lawyer as to the witnesss capabl in court if the lawyer
have had experi with the wit if weak ar discov the question probabl
will be direct to that area
oppos counsel also might attempt to take psycholog control of a wit by
us physic presenc to intimid
make nonstop ey contact
challeng space of the wit
ask question at a fast pace to confus the wit
not allow the expert to explain or deviat from the exact question
physic domin often is us by oppos counsel oppos counsel will quickli
discov the respons pattern of the expert and might take an aggress stanc to lead the
expert to the point where he is unsur
counsel mai emploi the follow strateg method to discredit a wit or to diminish the
import of a witnesss testimoni these method could be us alon or in conjunct
with on anoth and ar not an allencompass list a good counsel in crossexamin
will quickli discov the witnesss weak area and emploi ani possibl techniqu to achiev
it goal
myopic vision
myopic vision entail get the expert to admit to a great amount of time be spent in the
investig of a matter then select an area to highlight about which the expert is unsur
or ha not done much work thi area might not be central to the issu in the case but it
must be relev to the conclus reach then the oppos counsel will make a larg
issu of it and prove that the expert vision is myopic in that the work wa limit in extent
or scope and as such substandard at the same time the matter of fee could be drawn in to
show that larg sum were expend to have thi obvious incomplet work done
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2823
safeti
thi approach involv lull the expert into a feel of fals secur by not attack him
after the expert feel secur the oppos counsel might find a small hole in the expert
testimoni that can be enlarg quickli thi approach often is character by be friendli
and conciliatori by which the juri is made sympathet to the caus of the oppos counsel
oppos counsel also might attempt to achiev a certain amount of associ with the
wit that will make the wit want to help the oppos counsel to bring out
inform do so mai result in the wit give inform that otherwis would not
have been given with thi addit inform it might be possibl to find a chink or hole
in the evid and open it further
contradict
oppos counsel might us lead question to forc the wit into a hard or
contradictori posit altern counsel can establish the credibl in court of a
potenti contradict document or quot from other articl written by expert in the field
if these document or articl ar in contradict to the expert then an admiss can be
obtain from the expert as to that contradict if a contradict exit the expert might be
drawn into an argument as to who is the most appropri or experienc person instanc
also occur in which a wit ha contradict himself or hi own articl written sever year
prior mere becaus of hi lack of memori or confus due to the attack
new inform
oppos counsel mai introduc new inform of which the expert might not be awar
thi normal is done to introduc confus in the witnesss mind in the hope that the
wit might contradict himself or develop a seri of altern scenario given the new
inform to show that the exist report and opinion ar no longer of valu
support oppos side theori
thi approach recogn an expert qualif and evid the same inform us
by the expert is then interpret by oppos counsel in a differ fashion to support an
altern theori by get the expert to agre to the altern interpret of the fact and
the altern theori the oppos counsel in effect ha made the expert a wit for the
other side thi techniqu is us to obtain concess from the wit that would damag
hi conclus and ultim hi credibl
testifi as an expert wit law
2824 2011 fraud examin manual
bia
thi method draw the expert counsel and the expert togeth to show possibl collus as
to the evid be present and henc to demonstr bia thi can be shown if the
oppos counsel can determin that the expert counsel had instruct the wit as to
what to sai or by limit the expert scope and thu hi conclus thi approach also can
focu on the question of whether or not the expert wa told by hi client what to do and look
for with thi approach oppos counsel might attempt to show that the expert overlook
import document in an effort to assist hi client
confront
thi method involv the us of a confront of will to put the wit into a situat in
which he might lose emot control and show anger onc a wit ha explod
credibl normal disappear
sound board
thi method us the wit as a sound board to reacquaint the juri with the favor
aspect to oppos counsel of the case thi techniqu often us the is it not true and
would you agre with me approach constant agreement is us to browbeat the expert
in the ey of the judg and juri agreement with variou question rais by the oppos
counsel also might be assum to be a gener concurr with the posit of the oppos
counsel
fee
thi method attack the wit on the basi of take an inordin amount of time for the
result given the attack might indic a lack of complet work and be correl to the fee
charg thi method often is relat to bia and myopic vision it might be suggest
that the wit and hi opinion ar in fact bias thi techniqu often build to a
conclus in which the oppos counsel arriv at the idea that the work wa superfici and
unprofession yet a great deal of monei wa receiv by the expert for thi and other area
of servic to the client the infer is that the testimoni wa purchas or that the expert
wa paid to overlook fact contradictori to the conclus reach
term of engag
thi techniqu normal is emploi by obtain the origin engag letter and
examin the term of engag oppos counsel can then show that the expert
intend to look onli at variou item in support of hi client and gloss over altern
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2825
theori gener to the detriment of the opposit as such the wit could be portrai
as partial
discredit the wit
discredit the wit is base on prove that the expert is unworthi to be a credibl
wit instructor to the court thi often can be accomplish by show that the expert is
current or ha previous been grossli bias prejud or corrupt been convict of
crimin activ been shown to engag in immor activ made inconsist statement
acquir a reput for a lack of verac or exagger hi qualif discredit also
could consist of look at the qualiti of the expert educ background to reveal ani
other unusu activ that might bia the wit or exclud him from the court as an expert
person attack
anoth crossexamin tactic often us by attornei is to kill the messeng these
attack ar of a more person natur and gener includ some of the follow
the wit is unqualifi
the wit displai unprofession behavior dure the examin such as ask
person or sexual question dure interview
the wit had a conflict of interest
the wit wa harass phone call at home threaten voic mail etc
failur to follow the standard of the profess
addition the attornei mai attempt to discredit expert by try to show that thei fail to
follow the standard best practic or profession conduct rule set forth by their profess
such as the acf for fraud examin or other profession bodi such as the aicpa the
iia or state bar associ
for cfe it is extrem import to be familiar with the tool and techniqu set forth in
the fraud examin manual there have been case where enterpris defens attornei have
obtain copi of the manual and quizz the fraud examin about whether or not the
method set forth in the manual were follow likewis attornei will often question cfe
about the acf code of profession ethic particularli regard the prohibit against
state an opinion of guilt or innoc which is discuss below
it is import to understand that the fraud examin manual doe not set forth standard
the manual provid the cfe with inform suggest and method for conduct a
testifi as an expert wit law
2826 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud examin a cfe is alwai requir to follow the code of profession ethic but
he is not requir to follow what is set forth in the fraud examin manual
howev if a fraud examin deviat from the normal investig method set forth in the
manual he should have an explan as to why it wa appropri and explain that the
manual is onli provid as guidanc
