2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options/Option Values and Premiums


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Option Values and Premiums 
There are two values that make up option premiums: intrinsic value and time value.  
To have any intrinsic value an option must be in the money. Out of the money options have 
only time value. From the above example, the XYZ $85 call closed today at a premium of 
$5.70 per share. This call option is $3 in the money because the underlying XYZ stock 
closed above the strike price at $88 per share.  The premium has $3 intrinsic value while the 
remaining $2.70 is time value. 
 
While the concept of intrinsic value is rather straightforward the concept of time value is 
complex and beyond the scope of this writing. It is worth noting, however, that the 
mathematical formula for pricing option time value was first introduced by Fischer Black 
and Myron S. Scholes in 1973. The formula takes six factors into account: underlying price, 
strike price, time to expiration, volatility of the underlying, dividends and interest rates. For 
further information on this and other topics on options, visit the Learning Center on the 
CBOE Web page (www.cboe.com). 
 



:


option valu and premium
there ar two valu that make up option premium intrins valu and time valu
to have ani intrins valu an option must be in the monei out of the monei option have
onli time valu from the abov exampl the xyz 85 call close todai at a premium of
570 per share thi call option is 3 in the monei becaus the underli xyz stock
close abov the strike price at 88 per share the premium ha 3 intrins valu while the
remain 270 is time valu
while the concept of intrins valu is rather straightforward the concept of time valu is
complex and beyond the scope of thi write it is worth note howev that the
mathemat formula for price option time valu wa first introduc by fischer black
and myron s schole in 1973 the formula take six factor into account underli price
strike price time to expir volatil of the underli dividend and interest rate for
further inform on thi and other topic on option visit the learn center on the
cboe web page wwwcboecom
