2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Front Running — Dual Trading


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Front Running — Dual Trading 
Front running an order is a type of insider trading. Although it usually will not cause a direct 
loss to the customer, it could, and is a violation of exchange rules. Front running involves 
the use for profit of the privileged knowledge of a customer’s order to buy or sell a large 
amount of a commodity, options, or security that, because of its size, is likely to move the 
market. Back office personnel could have knowledge of such an order and buy or sell for 
their own account ahead of the customer. Because order fillers on the exchange floor are 
allowed to trade for their own account and fill orders for customers (dual trading) they also 
have an opportunity.  
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1535 
Consider the following scenario: an order is received from a hedger to sell 500 December 
cattle futures contracts at the market. If the order filler knows that current market conditions 
are such that this order will move the market significantly lower, it would be very tempting 
to sell a few contracts for himself and profit from the market decline when he executes the 
customer order. Order fillers are required to ope rate in the best interest of the customer and 
“work” the order to get the best price. Howev er, once the trader has established his short 
position, it is really in his own interest to drive the market as far down as possible when 
executing the 500 contract sell order. In this situation, the order filler may not give his best 
efforts and could hurt the customer. 
 
The vast majority of exchange members would never put themselves ahead of a customer, 
but it has happened in the past. In today’s markets with sophisticated surveillance, exchange 
investigative personnel actively guard against this type of activity. The time stamps on the 
customer order, time and sales reports from the exchange, and the account activity of the 
trader would have to be obtained and examined to substantiate any front running allegation. 
This information is easily obtainable. Brokerage compliance personnel should easily detect 
front running by back office personnel by periodically checking their account activity or not 
allowing them to open trading accounts at all. 
 



:


front run dual trade
front run an order is a type of insid trade although it usual will not caus a direct
loss to the custom it could and is a violat of exchang rule front run involv
the us for profit of the privileg knowledg of a custom order to bui or sell a larg
amount of a commod option or secur that becaus of it size is like to move the
market back offic personnel could have knowledg of such an order and bui or sell for
their own account ahead of the custom becaus order filler on the exchang floor ar
allow to trade for their own account and fill order for custom dual trade thei also
have an opportun
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11535
consid the follow scenario an order is receiv from a hedger to sell 500 decemb
cattl futur contract at the market if the order filler know that current market condit
ar such that thi order will move the market significantli lower it would be veri tempt
to sell a few contract for himself and profit from the market declin when he execut the
custom order order filler ar requir to op rate in the best interest of the custom and
work the order to get the best price howev er onc the trader ha establish hi short
posit it is realli in hi own interest to drive the market as far down as possibl when
execut the 500 contract sell order in thi situat the order filler mai not give hi best
effort and could hurt the custom
the vast major of exchang member would never put themselv ahead of a custom
but it ha happen in the past in todai market with sophist surveil exchang
investig personnel activ guard against thi type of activ the time stamp on the
custom order time and sale report from the exchang and the account activ of the
trader would have to be obtain and examin to substanti ani front run alleg
thi inform is easili obtain brokerag complianc personnel should easili detect
front run by back offic personnel by period check their account activ or not
allow them to open trade account at all
