2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Insider Trading/PUBLIC DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


PUBLIC DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
In 2000, the SEC adopted rules concerning public disclosure of information. Regulation FD 
(Fair Disclosure) was promulgated to eliminate “selective” disclosure by companies to 
certain groups (such as brokers and analysts) before such information was made available to 
the public. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1540                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Regulation states that if a company, or someone on its behalf, discloses “material non-
 public” information to a particular group (primarily market securities professionals), it must 
make a public disclosure of the information. The timing of the disclosure depends on 
whether the disclosure was intentional or inadvertent. If the disclosure was intentional, then 
company must make the disclosure simultaneously. If the disclosure was inadvertent, then 
the company must make the disclosure “promptly.” 
 
The SEC provides three options for proper dissemination: 
1. File the information with the SEC on a Form 8-K.  
2. Disseminate the information through a press release.  
3. Disseminate the information through any other method or combination of methods that 
are reasonably designed to provide broad public distribution of the information, such as 
an announcement at a press conference open to the public.  
 
Regulation FD only applies to material communications between company executives or 
authorized spokespersons to analysts, institutional investors, and holders of the company’s 
stock. Regulation FD also applies only to senior executives and excludes communications 
with the media, with ratings agencies, and with customers conducted in the normal course of 
business. Information is considered “material” if there is a substantial likelihood that a 
reasonable shareholder would consider it important in making an investment decision, or if 
it would have significantly altered the total mix of information available. 
 



:


public disclosur requir
in 2000 the sec adopt rule concern public disclosur of inform regul fd
fair disclosur wa promulg to elimin select disclosur by compani to
certain group such as broker and analyst befor such inform wa made avail to
the public
secur fraud financi transact
11540 2011 fraud examin manual
the regul state that if a compani or someon on it behalf disclos materi non
public inform to a particular group primarili market secur profession it must
make a public disclosur of the inform the time of the disclosur depend on
whether the disclosur wa intent or inadvert if the disclosur wa intent then
compani must make the disclosur simultan if the disclosur wa inadvert then
the compani must make the disclosur promptli
the sec provid three option for proper dissemin
1 file the inform with the sec on a form 8k
2 dissemin the inform through a press releas
3 dissemin the inform through ani other method or combin of method that
ar reason design to provid broad public distribut of the inform such as
an announc at a press confer open to the public
regul fd onli appli to materi commun between compani execut or
author spokesperson to analyst institut investor and holder of the compani
stock regul fd also appli onli to senior execut and exclud commun
with the media with rate agenc and with custom conduct in the normal cours of
busi inform is consid materi if there is a substanti likelihood that a
reason sharehold would consid it import in make an invest decis or if
it would have significantli alter the total mix of inform avail
