2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud and the Internet


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Securities Fraud and the Internet 
Of course, the very technology that gives us access to almost limitless information also gives 
the criminal greater opportunity to commit crime. Another factor that works in favor of the 
online scam artist is that there has traditionally been a culture of trust and benevolence on 
the Internet.  
 
Using the Internet to promote fraudulent investment schemes is relatively easy and cheap. 
There is the potential to reach hundreds of thousands of people using equipment and 
software that are very inexpensive. There is enough competition between providers of 
Internet access that the cost of maintaining a home page on the Web is very low. 
 
The Internet is already being used to solicit investors. Many illegal pyramid schemes have 
professional-looking websites, for example. Use of e-mail and the Internet also makes it 
easier for crooks to conceal their identities and operate anonymously from other countries.  
 
Securities laws are based on geographic boundaries; on the Internet there are no boundaries. 
With the proliferation of “cyber cash” and va rious ways of exchanging payment for goods 
and services over the Internet, the fraud examiner can expect to see a huge rise in financial 
fraud committed online. Particularly prevalent online are the so called “pump-and-dump” 
schemes in which promoters use Internet newsletters and bulletin boards to hype stocks they 
bought for little or no money so they can sell on a rising market. 
 



:


secur fraud and the internet
of cours the veri technolog that give us access to almost limitless inform also give
the crimin greater opportun to commit crime anoth factor that work in favor of the
onlin scam artist is that there ha tradition been a cultur of trust and benevol on
the internet
us the internet to promot fraudul invest scheme is rel easi and cheap
there is the potenti to reach hundr of thousand of peopl us equip and
softwar that ar veri inexpens there is enough competit between provid of
internet access that the cost of maintain a home page on the web is veri low
the internet is alreadi be us to solicit investor mani illeg pyramid scheme have
professionallook websit for exampl us of email and the internet also make it
easier for crook to conceal their ident and oper anonym from other countri
secur law ar base on geograph boundari on the internet there ar no boundari
with the prolifer of cyber cash and va riou wai of exchang payment for good
and servic over the internet the fraud examin can expect to see a huge rise in financi
fraud commit onlin particularli preval onlin ar the so call pumpanddump
scheme in which promot us internet newslett and bulletin board to hype stock thei
bought for littl or no monei so thei can sell on a rise market
