2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud and the Internet/Newsletters


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Newsletters 
In this context, a newsletter is not an independent, objective publication discussing the 
merits of a particular securities offering. Such objective analysis does exist, but, more often 
than not, the slick marketing document is a far cry from the independent analysis that it 
purports to be. In reality, the company publishing the newsletter is often paid to hype a 
particular stock by the promoter. Consequently, there is a serious danger of 
misrepresentation to the investor. Usually the cozy relationship between the stock promoter 
and the newsletter publisher is not disclosed to the prospective investor. Neither is the fact 
that the promoter pays to have his offering receive prominent and flattering treatment. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1550                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The newsletter may take the form of an actual document mailed out to subscribers who may 
or may not pay for the privilege. Often, the information is imparted via a professional 
website designed to motivate investors to act on the great opportunity being offered.  
 
Usually, information will be gathered on those who subscribe to such publications or view 
the website. This data is rich with free leads to securities representatives or others who 
promote the securities being hyped in the newsletter. The identity of investors who have 
shown some type of interest in a particular offering covered in the publication is a valuable 
source of new business.  
 



:


newslett
in thi context a newslett is not an independ object public discuss the
merit of a particular secur offer such object analysi doe exist but more often
than not the slick market document is a far cry from the independ analysi that it
purport to be in realiti the compani publish the newslett is often paid to hype a
particular stock by the promot consequ there is a seriou danger of
misrepresent to the investor usual the cozi relationship between the stock promot
and the newslett publish is not disclos to the prospect investor neither is the fact
that the promot pai to have hi offer receiv promin and flatter treatment
secur fraud financi transact
11550 2011 fraud examin manual
the newslett mai take the form of an actual document mail out to subscrib who mai
or mai not pai for the privileg often the inform is impart via a profession
websit design to motiv investor to act on the great opportun be offer
usual inform will be gather on those who subscrib to such public or view
the websit thi data is rich with free lead to secur repres or other who
promot the secur be hype in the newslett the ident of investor who have
shown some type of interest in a particular offer cover in the public is a valuabl
sourc of new busi
