2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/What Is White-Collar Crime?


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


What Is White-Collar Crime? 
Since the term was first used, there have been constant disputes regarding what is (or should 
be) the definition of white-collar crime.  The designation was coined by Edwin H. Sutherland in 
December l939 during his presidential address in Philadelphia to the American Sociological 
Society. Ten years later Sutherland published a monograph, White Collar Crime, in which he 
offered an arguable, vague definition of the concept in a footnote: White-collar crime was 
said to be “Crime in the upper, white-collar class, which is composed of respectable, or at 
least respected, business, and professional men.” These crimes were confined to acts 
performed by white-collar persons in occupational roles, thereby excluding “most of their 
cases of murder, adultery, and intoxication, since these are not customarily a part of their 
occupational procedures.” 1  
 
A few pages after this definitional foray, Sutherland illustrated white-collar crime through 
examples of thefts by chain store employees and overcharges by garage mechanics and watch 
repairers. There was little consistency between his definition and his illustrations of what 
might fall within it. 
 
Nonetheless, the term white-collar crime  has been widely incorporated into popular and 
scholarly language throughout the world, though the designation economic crime  is sometimes 
used as well. The difficulty with economic crime  is that so many illegal acts, including murder, 
are often committed in order to achieve economic gain. The United Nations, for its part, 
adopted the phrase abuse of power  for those behaviors that correspond to white-collar crimes 
as defined by Sutherland. In addition, other designations, such as upperworld crime, crimes by the 
powerful, avocational crime, crime in the suites, and organizational crime, are sometimes employed to 
designate more or less the same phenomena as white-collar crime. 
 
A major difficulty with the concept as formulated by Sutherland is that he is designating an 
offense category that has no equivalent in the law. Certain statute offenses can be identified 
as those that by and large will be committed by persons in the elite classes — offenses such as 
anti-trust violations and insider trading — but what is to be done definitionally with, say, the 
proofreader, who is paid little more than minimum wage and learns from information that 
he is working on of a merger between the company and one of its strong competitors. He 
                                                 
1Edwin H. Sutherland, White-Collar Crime (New York:  Dryden Press, 1949), p. 9. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.402   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
buys stock and reaps a considerable profit, but is then caught and prosecuted as an inside 
trader. Is this person to be regarded as a white-collar criminal? Numerous further examples 
of situations that are definitionally ambiguous can be offered. 
 
The Dictionary of Criminal Justice Data Terminology, published by the Federal Bureau of Justice 
Statistics, defines white-collar crime as “nonviolent crime for financial gain committed by 
means of deception by persons whose occupational status is entrepreneurial, professional, or 
semi-professional and utilizing their special occupational skills and opportunities; also 
nonviolent crime for financial gain utilizing deception and committed by anyone having 
special technical and professional knowledge of business and government, irrespective of the 
person’s occupation.” 
 
This definition certainly catches in its net a wide array of wrongdoers. But critics fault it for 
its explicit omission of violent offenses. What about a doctor who knowingly performs 
unnecessary surgery in order to collect a large fee and ends up causing the patient to die? Or 
a surgeon who kills a patient because of his incompetence? Or how about the numerous 
deaths and injuries from toxic wastes, polluted air, and violations of health and safety 
regulations? Are such results not the product of white-collar crime? 
 
Though there is no consensus within the scholarly community, one definition today of 
white-collar crime is that proposed by Albert J. Reiss, Jr. and Albert Biderman: 
 
White-collar crime violations are those violations of law to which penalties are attached that 
involve the use of a violator’s position of econom ic power, influence, or trust in the legitimate 
economic or political institutional order for the purpose of illegal gain, or to commit an 
illegal act for personal or organizational gain. 2   
 
Opportunity is an important ingredient of white-collar crime. An unemployed youth needing 
funds might turn to armed robbery or burglary. He is in no position to violate the anti-trust 
laws, though doing so might well provide him with a great deal more funds and lesser 
likelihood of being caught. The bank president or the company chief executive, for their 
part, can deal with a personal cash shortage through a variety of illegal tactics that are tied to 
their business position. Criminals will often commit offenses in ways with which they are 
most familiar, ways that they can most easily accomplish, and those that have the lowest 
                                                 
Albert J. Reiss, Jr., and Albert Biderman, Data Sources on White-Collar Law-Breaking (Washington, DC:  
National Institute of Justice, U. S. Department of Justice, 1980). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  White-Collar Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.403  
likelihood of dire consequences. An often-unheralded bonus of social status is access to 
opportunities for less dirty, “more decent” kinds of crime. 
 
 



:


what is whitecollar crime
sinc the term wa first us there have been constant disput regard what is or should
be the definit of whitecollar crime the design wa coin by edwin h sutherland in
decemb l939 dure hi presidenti address in philadelphia to the american sociolog
societi ten year later sutherland publish a monograph white collar crime in which he
offer an arguabl vagu definit of the concept in a footnot whitecollar crime wa
said to be crime in the upper whitecollar class which is compos of respect or at
least respect busi and profession men these crime were confin to act
perform by whitecollar person in occup role therebi exclud most of their
case of murder adulteri and intox sinc these ar not customarili a part of their
occup procedur 1
a few page after thi definit forai sutherland illustr whitecollar crime through
exampl of theft by chain store employe and overcharg by garag mechan and watch
repair there wa littl consist between hi definit and hi illustr of what
might fall within it
nonetheless the term whitecollar crime ha been wide incorpor into popular and
scholarli languag throughout the world though the design econom crime is sometim
us as well the difficulti with econom crime is that so mani illeg act includ murder
ar often commit in order to achiev econom gain the unit nation for it part
adopt the phrase abus of power for those behavior that correspond to whitecollar crime
as defin by sutherland in addit other design such as upperworld crime crime by the
power avoc crime crime in the suit and organiz crime ar sometim emploi to
design more or less the same phenomena as whitecollar crime
a major difficulti with the concept as formul by sutherland is that he is design an
offens categori that ha no equival in the law certain statut offens can be identifi
as those that by and larg will be commit by person in the elit class offens such as
antitrust violat and insid trade but what is to be done definition with sai the
proofread who is paid littl more than minimum wage and learn from inform that
he is work on of a merger between the compani and on of it strong competitor he
1edwin h sutherland whitecollar crime new york dryden press 1949 p 9
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4402 2011 fraud examin manual
bui stock and reap a consider profit but is then caught and prosecut as an insid
trader is thi person to be regard as a whitecollar crimin numer further exampl
of situat that ar definition ambigu can be offer
the dictionari of crimin justic data terminolog publish by the feder bureau of justic
statist defin whitecollar crime as nonv iolent crime for financi gain commit by
mean of decept by person whose occup statu is entrepreneuri profession or
semiprofession and util their special occup skill and opportun also
nonviol crime for financi gain util decept and commit by anyon have
special technic and profession knowledg of busi and govern irrespect of the
person occup
thi definit certainli catch in it net a wide arrai of wrongdoer but critic fault it for
it explicit omiss of violent offens what about a doctor who knowingli perform
unnecessari surgeri in order to collect a larg fee and end up caus the patient to die or
a surgeon who kill a patient becaus of hi incompet or how about the numer
death and injuri from toxic wast pollut air and violat of health and safeti
regul ar such result not the product of whitecollar crime
though there is no consensu within the scholarli commun on definit todai of
whitecollar crime is that propos by albert j reiss jr and albert biderman
whitecollar crime violat ar those violat of law to which penalti ar attach that
involv the us of a violat posit of econom ic power influenc or trust in the legitim
econom or polit institut order for the purpos of illeg gain or to commit an
illeg act for person or organiz gain 2
opportun is an import ingredi of whitecollar crime an unemploi youth need
fund might turn to arm robberi or burglari he is in no posit to violat the antitrust
law though do so might well provid him with a great deal more fund and lesser
likelihood of be caught the bank presid or the compani chief execut for their
part can deal with a person cash shortag through a varieti of illeg tactic that ar ti to
their busi posit crimin will often commit offens in wai with which thei ar
most familiar wai that thei can most easili accomplish and those that have the lowest
albert j reiss jr and albert biderman data sourc on whitecollar lawbreak washington dc
nation institut of justic u s depart of justic 1980
fraud prevent and deterr whitecollar crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4403
likelihood of dire consequ an oftenunherald bonu of social statu is access to
opportun for less dirti more decent kind of crime
