2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/WHITE-COLLAR CRIME/Crimes of the Middle Classes — A Look at White-Collar Crime/Imprisonment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


White-Collar Crime


:


Imprisonment 
Crimes does find that the highest status group—an ti-trust violators — were the least likely to 
receive prison time (about 1 in 5) and to draw the shortest sentence (1.8 months). Securities 
fraud led the group, with over 67 percent doing time, followed by tax fraud (58.9 percent) 
and mail fraud (55.1 percent). But in considering all offenders in all groups, the authors 
discovered that the higher an individual’s status, the more likely the person was to be 
imprisoned: “All else being equal, doctors will have about a 30 percent greater likelihood of 
being imprisoned [for a white-collar crime] than truck drivers and almost a 13 percent 
greater likelihood than managers.” 18 Judges seem to find people of higher prestige more at 
fault, or in other words, more blameworthy, in the commission of their crimes. 
 
One remarkable variable in determining the severity of punishment was where the case was 
tried. The districts of Maryland, Northern  Illinois, and Northern Texas tended toward 
harsher sentences; Northern Georgia and Southern New York handed down the lightest 
ones. 
 
More often than prison, the punishment of  choice for white-collar criminals is the 
imposition of fines. Whereas 6 percent of the “common criminals” in the survey received 
fines, all of the anti-trust violators did; embezz lers were the least likely group to be fined, but 
even so, their 15 percent rate far exceeded the norm. For fines as well as imprisonment, 
higher status usually meant a higher penalty. Analysis showed that “white defendants, those 
with more impeccable records, and those who have higher class positions are more likely to 
be fined.” 19 But while the decision to fine seems based on status, the actual levies are often 
comparatively low. For anti-trust suits, the mean fine was $9,808; for embezzlement, it was 
just $1,397. Even well-off offenders got off light: a man convicted of fixing the price of 
candy bars in an eastern state, with a net worth exceeding $190,000, was fined $3,500; 
another defendant, whose net worth approached $1.4 million, was fined $5,000 for credit 
fraud. Only 4 percent of offenders were ever given the statute’s maximum penalty. 
 
                                                 
18 Weisburd, p. 143. 
19 Weisburd, p. 157. 
White-Collar Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.414   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Obviously, most white-collar crimes don’t even  approach the billion-dollar levels of the 
stereotype. An accurate picture actually looks rather mundane. “For every truly complicated 
and rarified offense,” according to Wheeler and his colleagues, “there are many others that 
are simple and could be carried out by almost anyone who can read, write, and give an 
outward appearance of stability.” 20 More than anything else — more than status, or class 
position, or heritage — the white-collar criminal needs an opportunity and some sort  
of organization.  
 



:


imprison
crime doe find that the highest statu groupan titrust violat were the least like to
receiv prison time about 1 in 5 and to draw the shortest sentenc 18 month secur
fraud led the group with over 67 percent do time follow by tax fraud 589 percent
and mail fraud 551 percent but in consid all offend in all group the author
discov that the higher an individu statu the more like the person wa to be
imprison all els be equal doctor will have about a 30 percent greater likelihood of
be imprison for a whitecollar crime than truck driver and almost a 13 percent
greater likelihood than manag 18 judg seem to find peopl of higher prestig more at
fault or in other word more blameworthi in the commiss of their crime
on remark variabl in determin the sever of punish wa where the case wa
tri the district of maryland northern illinoi and northern texa tend toward
harsher sentenc northern georgia and southern new york hand down the lightest
on
more often than prison the punish of choic for whitecollar crimin is the
imposit of fine wherea 6 percent of the common crimin in the survei receiv
fine all of the antitrust violat did embezz ler were the least like group to be fine but
even so their 15 percent rate far exceed the norm for fine as well as imprison
higher statu usual meant a higher penalti analysi show that white defend those
with more impecc record and those who have higher class posit ar more like to
be fine 19 but while the decis to fine seem base on statu the actual levi ar often
compar low for antitrust suit the mean fine wa 9808 for embezzl it wa
just 1397 even welloff offend got off light a man convict of fix the price of
candi bar in an eastern state with a net worth exceed 190000 wa fine 3500
anoth defend whose net worth approach 14 million wa fine 5000 for credit
fraud onli 4 percent of offend were ever given the statut maximum penalti
18 weisburd p 143
19 weisburd p 157
whitecollar crime fraud prevent and deterr
4414 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious most whitecollar crime dont even approach the billiondollar level of the
stereotyp an accur pictur actual look rather mundan for everi truli complic
and rarifi offens accord to wheeler and hi colleagu there ar mani other that
ar simpl and could be carri out by almost anyon who can read write and give an
outward appear of stabil 20 more than anyth els more than statu or class
posit or heritag the whitecollar crimin need an opportun and some sort
of organ
