2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS 
 
In today’s world, computers are an integral part of fraud examination. Whether using the 
Internet in an investigation or to analyze data, it is essential that the fraud examiner have 
access to a computer and its applications. Computers contain volumes of data—financial 
data, marketing data, customer data, correspondence, and more, and evidence of fraud could 
be located within that data. Unfortunately, fraudulent data often looks like legitimate data 
when viewed in the raw. Taking a sample and testing it may not uncover fraudulent activity. 
 
Fortunately, for fraud examiners, software companies have developed computer programs 
that enable users to sift through mounds of information. These programs identify current 
customers, potential customers, and future trends within their respective industries, and can 
be configured to identify breaks in audit control programs and anomalies in accounting 
records.  
 
In general, these software programs perform two primary functions that fraud examiners use 
to explore and analyze large amounts of data: data mining and data analytics. Data mining  is 
the science of extracting information from large data sets or databases. Data analysis  refers to 
any statistical process used to analyze data. And if properly used, these processes can provide 
the ultimate system of red flags, detecting a fraudulent situation long before previously 
possible. 
 
 
Data Mining 
Data mining has roots in statistics, machine learning, data management and databases, 
pattern recognition, and artificial intelligence. All of these are concerned with certain aspects 
of data analysis, so they have much in common;  yet they each have a distinct and individual 
flavor, emphasizing particular problems and types of solutions. 
 
Data mining has great potential to help organizations shift their energy and focus to the 
most important information in their databases. Data mining tools comb databases for 
obscured patterns, finding predictive information that even experts may not recognize. 
Using data mining technologies, companies can evaluate a plethora of information, spotting 
patterns in their marketing and business procedures.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.602   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Although data mining technologies provide key advantages to marketing and business 
activities, they can also manipulate financial data that was previously hidden within a 
company’s database, enabling fraud examiners to detect potential fraud.  
 
Previously, the data-mining process required a computer programmer to oversee the 
process; however, this is no longer necessary. The current method uses a computer and 
computer software to assist in the data-mining process. Data mining software provides an 
easy to use computerized process that gives the fraud examiner the ability to get to data at a 
required level of detail.  
 
Data mining combines several different techniques essential to detecting fraud, including the 
streamlining of raw data into understandable patterns.  
 
Data mining can also help prevent fraud before it happens. For example, SPSS Business 
Intelligence, a consulting group for businesses in electronic commerce, reports that some of 
their customers use data mining tools and applications to develop anti-fraud models that 
score transactions in real-time. The scoring is customized for each business, involving 
factors such as locale of the order, frequency of the order, payment history, and other 
factors. Once a transaction is assigned a high-risk score, the merchant can decide whether to 
accept the transaction, deny it, or investigate further.  
 
Data mining is an effective way for fraud examiners to develop fraud targets for further 
investigation. It can mine databases for various fraud indicators, such as: (1) specific types of 
transactions; (2) patterns within the data; or (3) a relationship between two data fields that 
should not have a relationship (e.g., the same address or telephone number for companies 
with different names). Targets are then examined to develop an investigative strategy 
involving site visits and face-to-face interviews. Data mining can also be refined based on 
interviews of targets.  
 
One of the most sophisticated uses of data mining is known as computer matching. Also called 
data matching  (in Australia and Canada), this approach involves the comparison of two 
discreet data sets to identify questionable overlaps.  
 
But before applying data mining processes, it is important to identify the sources from which 
the data will be collected. Data may be stored in any of the following locations: 
• Mainframe software 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.603 
• Laptop installed software 
• Security system software 
• Hand held devices issued by the company’s employees (e.g., smart phones, thumb drives, 
inventory scanning equipment, etc.) 
• Company vehicle GPS systems 
• Telephone systems  
• Time card systems 
• Key card access 
 
Often, companies use data warehouses to manage data for analysis. Data warehouses  are 
repositories of a company’s electronic data designed to facilitate reporting and analysis. By 
storing data in a data warehouse, data users can query and analyze relevant data stored in a 
single location. Thus, a company with a data warehouse can perform various types of 
analytic operations (e.g., identifying red flags, transaction trends, patterns, or anomalies) to 
assist management with its decision-making responsibilities. 
 
Although this section focuses on electronic data, examiners should also identify manually 
generated data, such as: 
• Visitor check-in logs 
• Appointment logs or individual calendars 
• Customer receipts for cash payments 
• Return merchandise slips 
• Any manually maintained lists 
 
After the examiner has identified the data sources, he should identify how the information is 
stored. This means reviewing the database schema and technical documentation, which 
should allow the investigator to determine how information is stored. One must be ready to 
face a number of pitfalls when attempting to identify how information is stored, from weak 
or nonexistent documentation to limited collaboration from the IT department.  
 
Moreover, once collected, it is critical to ensure that the data is complete and appropriate for 
the analysis to be performed. Depending on how the data was collected and processed, it 
could require some scrubbing to make it usable for analysis purposes; it may be necessary to 
modify certain field formats (e.g., date, time, currency, etc.) to make the information usable. 
 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data Analysis 
Once data has been extracted using data mining  techniques, it must be analyzed. While data 
analysis is used mainly as an audit technique, it can be an important part of the fraud 
detection toolkit. Although it cannot be used as evidence that a fraud was committed or that 
a specific individual was involved, it can serve to identify red flags associated with a wide 
variety of frauds. It will thereby provide investigators with a trail to follow. 
 
 
Using Data Analysis Software 
 
Advantages of Using Data Analysis Software 
There are five significant advantages to using data analysis software. First, data analysis 
software allows the fraud examiner to centralize an investigation, relying less on others to 
gather pertinent information. Because of the amount of information data mining software is 
able to sort through, the examiner no longer has to rely on different sources for information. 
In the past, when analyzing a company’s books for possible discrepancies, the examiner 
would have to ask for the assistance of several persons within the accounting department to 
locate the pertinent information. Now, however, the data analysis program will do all the 
“leg work,” ensuring an above-the-board investigation without many variables. 
 
Second, data analysis software allows the fraud examiner to ensure that an investigation is 
accurate and complete. In the past, an audit or fraud examination could only be complete to 
the extent that the investigator was able to sift through information. When looking at one 
month’s worth of a company’s transactions, a fraud examiner might be forced to research 
more than one million transactions. Given the amount of time an auditor generally has to 
conduct a single examination, the depth of a manual audit can be suspect at best. By using a 
data analysis program, the fraud examiner can run several different analysis patterns in a 
matter of hours, enabling him to look at greater volumes of information from a number of 
different angles. These procedures lead to a more comprehensive examination. 
 
Third, data analysis allows the fraud examiner to base predictions about the probability of a 
fraudulent situation on reliable statistical information. By utilizing data mining software, the 
fraud examiner can base any strong suspicions of fraudulent activities on hard numbers. 
Because the software will compare one month’s expenditures with the same data for the rest 
of the months of the year, the fraud examiner can point conclusively to troubled areas. With 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.605 
hard data to support a fraud examiner’s suspicions, a company is more likely to conduct 
further investigations into the wrongdoing. 
 
Fourth, data analysis allows the fraud examiner to search entire data files for red flags of 
possible fraud. The number of checkpoints a fraud examiner can set up using a data analysis 
program is staggering. By cutting down on the paperwork involved in an investigation, the 
fraud examiner is able to execute a number of different searches and analyses of the 
company’s raw data.  
 
Finally, data analysis can assist the fraud examiner in developing reference files for ongoing 
fraud detection and investigation work. By performing audits and examinations with data 
analysis software, the fraud examiner will begin to recognize trends and set up a list of 
precedents for individual accounting situations, such as a monthly statement reconciliation. 
In doing so, the fraud examiner can establish a “norm” with which to compare individual 
months or years. These precedents can also be used by the fraud examiner in general terms, 
and the knowledge can be applied to nearly any fraud investigation. 
 
Core Data Analysis Software Functions 
Computers can scan database information for several specific types of information, creating 
a red-flag system. To perform this, most software packages use a combination of different 
functions. These functions are: 
• Sorting 
• Record selection 
• Joining files 
• Multi-file processing 
• Correlation analysis 
• Verifying multiples of a number 
• Compliance verification 
• Duplicate searches 
• Vertical ratio analysis 
• Horizontal ratio analysis 
• Date functions 
• Graphing 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.606   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sorting 
To sort means to arrange data in a meaningful order. Sorting is nothing new; most reports 
you read are sorted in some way. With sorted data, you can quickly pick out what is 
important. An investigator can ask a program to sort information using different methods, 
such as alphabetically or numerically. For instance, when searching for a suspected 
fraudster’s name out of thousands in a check disbursement file, the software can quickly sort 
a list of payee names. 
 
Sample customer sales data  
 
Date Invoice Customer Amount 
5/4/10 M3158001 J789889 $12,500.00 
7/5/10 M5958256 Q189425 $14,580.00 
8/9/10 M8897158 T681897 $38,889.00 
7/25/09 M1569897 T888971 $87,569.56 
12/20/10 M3158001 P123089 $12,500.00 
1/8/10 M2098159 W555258 $56,347.23 
 
Data sorted by invoice number  
 
Date Invoice Customer Amount 
7/25/09 M1569897 T888971 $87,569.56 
1/8/10 M2098159 W555258 $56,347.23 
5/4/10 M3158001 J789889 $12,500.00 
12/20/10 M3158001 P123089 $12,500.00 
7/5/10 M5958256 Q189425 $14,580.00 
8/9/10 M8897158 T681897 $38,889.00 
 
Data sorted by amount  
 
Date Invoice Customer Amount 
5/4/10 M3158001 J789889 $12,500.00 
12/20/10 M3158001 P123089 $12,500.00 
7/5/10 M5958256 Q189425 $14,580.00 
8/9/10 M8897158 T681897 $38,889.00 
1/8/10 M2098159 W555258 $56,347.23 
7/25/09 M1569897 T8 88971 $87,569.56 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.607 
Record Selection  
Specific record selection is accomplished by a request or query of the computer to find the 
occurrences of items or records in a field. This type of request will only return instances 
where the record did occur, effectively reducing large amounts of information into concise 
lists. Often, additional criteria placed on the record selection or query will reveal a more 
pertinent list of information. Most data analysis programs include simple Find macros to 
help locate specific records.  
 
Joining Files  
The Join function gathers together the specified parts of different data files. Joining files 
combines fields from two sorted input files into a third file. Join is used to match data in a 
transaction file with records in a master file, such as matching invoice data in an accounts 
receivable file to a master cluster. For example, you may need to compare two different files 
to find differing records between files. The following is an example of how joining two files 
can easily provide that information. 
 
File 1 
Customer Account Balance Last Invoice 
Jerry’s Cleaners 555221 $12,500 12/30/10 
Quality Garments 555658 $9,283 11/15/10 
Beverly’s Tailoring 554891 $27,588 01/15/10 
 
File 2 
Customer Account Balance Last Invoice 
Quality Garments 555658 $9,283 11/15/10 
McCloud’s Fabrics 556897 $10,888 09/24/10 
Beverly’s Tailoring 554891 $27,588 01/15/10 
 
The JOINED exception file 
Customer Account Balance Last Invoice 
McCloud’s Fabrics 556897 $10,888 09/24/09 
Jerry’s Cleaners 555221 $12,500 12/30/09 
 
Multi-File Processing  
Multi-file processing allows the user to relate several files by defining relationships between 
multiple files, without the use of the Join command. A common data relationship would be 
to relate an outstanding invoice master file to an accounts receivable file based on the 
customer number. The relationship can be further extended to include an invoice detail file 
based on invoice number. This relationship will allow you to see which customers have 
outstanding invoices sorted by date.  
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.608   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Correlation Analysis 
Using this function, investigators can determine the relationships between different variables 
in the raw data. Investigators can learn a lot about computer data files by learning the 
relationship between two variables. For example, we should expect a strong correlation 
between these independent and dependent variables because a direct relationship exists 
between the two variables. Hotel costs should increase as the number of days traveled 
increases. The gallons of paint used should increase as the number of houses built increases. 
You can probably use many more of such relationships. 
 
Independent Variable Dependent Variable 
Number of days traveling Hotel cost 
Number of documents printed Reams of paper used 
Number of houses built Paint used 
 
Verifying Multiples of a Number 
With this function, an auditor can determine whether regularly disbursed checks, such as 
reimbursement for mileage, are consistent within the regular rate. For instance, if the mileage 
checks do not measure up to the 30-cents-per-mile rate, a red flag should automatically be 
raised. 
 
Compliance Verification 
This function determines whether company policies are met by employee transactions. If a 
company limits the amount of its reimbursements, the software can check to see that this 
limit is being observed. Many times fraud exam iners can find early indications of fraud by 
testing detail data for values above or below specified amounts. For example, when 
employees are out of town, do they adhere to the company policy of not spending more 
than $30 a day for meals? For starters, we can look at the expense reports and select those 
with meal expenses exceeding $30. With the in formation returned from this simple query, we 
have a starting point for suspecting fraud. Even though these variances are small ($2 and $3), 
the time taken to research small variances can be well invested. The trail might lead to 
something big. After further investigation, you might learn that the employee did not have 
supporting documentation to submit because a vendor’s sales representative paid for all the 
meals. If this is the case, you have two fraud suspects, the employee and the employee’s boss 
who approved the report. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.609 
Duplicate Searches 
Fraud examiners and auditors can perform searches on invoice disbursements numerically to 
see if any invoices have been paid twice. By cross-checking the invoices with the vendors 
paid, duplicate billing can be easy to catch. 
 
Vertical Ratio Analysis 
Vertical analysis is a technique for analyzing the relationships between the items on an 
income statement, balance sheet, or statement of cash flows by expressing components as 
percentages. In the vertical analysis of an income statement, net sales is assigned 100 percent; 
on a balance sheet, total assets or total liabilities and equity is assigned 100 percent. All other 
items are expressed as a percentage of these two numbers.  
 
By performing this function, you can determine whether paid expenditures over a period are 
reasonable amounts. If one area of company expenses seems abnormally large for a short 
amount of time, a red flag should immediately be raised. 
 
Horizontal Ratio Analysis 
Horizontal analysis is a technique for analyzing the percentage change in individual financial 
statement items from one year to the next. The first year in the analysis is considered the 
base year, and the changes to subsequent years are computed as a percentage of the base 
year.  
 
This function determines the trends of a company’s expenses, inventory, and so on. 
Discrepancies in a company’s net profit or a large shift in amount of inventory would 
suggest that something is not right within the company.  
  
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.610   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Date Functions 
Various software programs allow you to check for differences in dates, such as invoice dates. 
By verifying that check disbursements are consistent, you can ensure that no suspicious 
payments were arranged by an employee. Analysis programs will also allow for aging of data. 
The following is an example of accounts receivable aging.  
 
 
BALANCE SHEET Vertical Analysis Horizontal Analysis
  Year One Year Two Change %C hange
 Assets
   Current Assets
     Cash 45,00 0           14 % 1 5,0 0 0           4% (30,0 0 0)          -67 %
     Accts Receivable 150,0 0 0         45 % 2 0 0,0 0 0         47 % 5 0,0 0 0           33 %
     Inventory 75,00 0           23 % 1 5 0,0 0 0         35 % 7 5,0 0 0           10 0 %
  Fi xed Assets (net) 60,00 0           18 % 6 0,0 0 0           14 % -                0%
 Total 33 0,0 0 0        10 0 % 4 2 5,0 0 0        100 % 9 5,0 0 0         29 %
  
 
Acc'ts Payable 95,00 0           29 % 2 1 5,0 0 0         51 % 1 2 0,0 0 0         12 6 %
 Long-term Debt 60,00 0           18 % 6 0,0 0 0           14 % -                0%
 Stockholder's Equity -                
   Common Stock 25,00 0           8% 2 5,0 0 0           6% -                0%
     Paid-in Capital 75,0 0 0           23 % 7 5,0 0 0           18 % -                0%
    Retained Earnings 75,00 0           23 % 5 0,0 0 0           12 % (25,0 0 0)          -33 %
 Total 33 0,0 0 0        10 0 % 4 2 5,0 0 0        100 % 9 5,0 0 0         29 %
 INCOME STATEMENT Vertical Analysis Horizontal Analysis
 Year One Year Two Change %Change
 Net Sales 250,0 0 0         10 0 % 4 5 0,0 0 0         100 % 2 0 0,0 0 0         80 %
 Cost of Goods Sold 125,0 0 0         50 % 3 0 0,0 0 0         67 % 1 7 5,0 0 0         14 0 %
 Gross Margin 125,0 0 0         50 % 1 5 0,0 0 0         33 % 2 5,0 0 0           20 %
 Operating Expenses   
  Selling Expenses 50,00 0           20 % 7 5,0 0 0           17 % 2 5,0 0 0           50 %
   Administrative Expenses 60,00 0           24 % 1 0 0,0 0 0         22 % 4 0,0 0 0           67 %
 Net Income 15,00 0          6% (25,0 0 0)        -6% (40,0 0 0)        -26 7 %
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.611 
Graphing 
Graphs, like pictures, are worth a thousand words. Data analysis programs can provide 
numerous types of graphs to give fraud examiners a quick glimpse of the data. For example 
an inquiry should be made as to why November expenses are $10,000 more than the 
monthly norm. 
 
 
General and Administrative Expenses 2010  
(in thousands)
 0  
5  
10  
15  
20  
25  
30  
35  
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
  
Examples of Data Analysis Queries 
The following are typical examples of data analysis queries that can be performed by data 
analysis software. 
 
General Ledger Analysis 
• Select specific journal entries for analysis. 
• Create actual to budget comparison reports. 
• Analyze and confirm specific ledger accounts for legitimate transaction activity. 
• Speed account reconciliation through specialized account queries. 
• Calculate financial ratios. 
• Calculate percentage comparison ratio between accounts. 
• Prepare custom reports, cash flow, profit/loss, and asset and liability total reports. 
• Compare summaries by major account in any order (low-high, high-low). 
• Create reports in any format by account, division, department, etc.  
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.612   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Accounts Receivable 
• Create a list of customer limit increases and decreases. 
• Age accounts receivable in various formats. 
• Identify gaps in sequential forms such as invoices. 
• Identify duplicate invoices or customer account numbers. 
• Show specified reports on credits taken by customers. 
• Report customer summaries by invoice, product, etc.  
• Identify customer activity by age, product, etc. 
• Compare customer credit limits and current or past balances. 
 
Sales Analysis 
• Create a report of all system overrides and sales exceptions. 
• Analyze returns and allowances by store, department, or other areas. 
• Summarize trends by customer type, products, salesperson, etc. 
• Compare ratios of current sales to outstanding receivables or other variables. 
• Generate reports on a correlation between product demand or supply and sales prices. 
 
Accounts Payable 
• Audit paid invoices for manual comparison with actual invoices. 
• Summarize large invoices by amount, vendor, etc. 
• Identify debits to expense accounts outside of set default accounts. 
• Reconcile check registers to disbursements by vendor invoice. 
• Verify vendor 1099 requirements. 
• Create vendor detail and summary analysis reports. 
• Review recurring monthly expenses and compare to posted/paid invoices. 
• Generate a report on specified vouchers for manual audit or investigation. 
 
Asset Management 
• Generate depreciation to cost reports. 
• Compare book and tax depreciation and indicate variances. 
• Sort asset values by asset type or dollar amount. 
• Select samples for asset existence verification. 
• Recalculate expense and reserve amounts using replacement costs. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.613 
Cash Disbursement 
• Summarize cash disbursements by account, bank, department, vendor, etc. 
• Verify audit trail for all disbursements by  purchase order, vendor, department, etc. 
• Generate vendor cash activity summary for analysis. 
• Identify disbursements by department, supervisor approval, or amount limits. 
 
Payroll 
• Summarize payroll activity by specific criteria for review. 
• Identify changes to payroll or employee files. 
• Compare timecard and payroll rates for possible discrepancies. 
• Prepare check amount reports for amounts over a certain limit. 
• Check proper supervisory authorization on payroll disbursements. 
 
Purchasing 
• Track scheduled receipt dates versus actual receipt dates, in summary and detail. 
• Compare vendor performance by summarizing item delivery times and amounts. 
• Isolate purchase order types for analysis. 
• Analyze late shipments. 
 
Data Analysis Checklist 
The following are some key issues to address as one conducts a data analysis. 
• Ensure data validity and data integrity. There is always a concern when the examiner 
moves data from one venue to another. One of the concerns is data validity. Is the data 
valid and pertinent to the investigation? The second concern is integrity. Is the valid data 
that was selected correct? A simple check or au dit of the validity and integrity of the data 
should be the first step in the data analysis.    
• Consider data format and structure. This consideration is important when the examiner 
wishes to import or export data with his computer. A date can be formatted into a 
number of different styles, such as mm/dd/yyyy. The structure of the data will also be 
important along with the extension. A text file will have a .txt extension associated with 
it. What format is the current data in? What format will the computer require? How does 
the examiner get the data from here to there if the data formats and structures are 
different? 
• Count the zeros. The examiner should perform a preliminary analysis to ensure that the 
key strategic issue he is about to develop is worth the effort before initiating his fraud 
investigation. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.614   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consider the spectrum of distinct levels of aggregation at which fraud monitoring is 
required. Determine the lowest level (transaction level), the highest level (multiparty 
criminal conspiracies), and the intervening layers that may be present in your industry 
and respective data. 
• Begin with the end in mind. In his book, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen 
Covey states that beginning with the end in mind is good habit. When you develop your 
fraud intelligence action plan, be certain to consider the end result. One question to ask 
may be, “Will this algorithm/consultant hold up under the intense scrutiny of a court of 
law?”  
 
Evaluating Data Analysis Software 
In short, there are no silver bullets. But any data analysis software should possess the 
following minimum requirements: 
• Data import/export capabilities. Considering your data format and structure, how easily 
is data imported/exported? 
• Data visualization. How easy is it to move your data from a spreadsheet into a graphic 
for analysis and interpretation? 
• Look for a suite of tools. Just as there is not one screwdriver for every job, there is not 
only one software program for the examiner’s  fraud intelligence efforts. Therefore, he 
should choose the most appropriate set of tools according to his data and then select the 
software that best fits his current and future needs.  
• Develop a two-pronged effort of using the computer to acquire fraud intelligence. Use 
commercial software currently on the market and begin collaborative activities with the 
academics at your local university. There are numerous software packages in various 
stages of development in academia that are in need of data to be tested. This can prove 
to be a win-win for both parties. The examiner has the data and the academics have the 
prototype software. 
 
Evaluating Data Mining Software 
Because no single software tool can satisfy all user purposes, examiners must consider the 
applications with respect to their particular needs. Ken Collier, an expert in data 
warehousing, business intelligence, software engineering, and agile methods, and his 
colleagues established a framework for evaluating data mining.3 The framework divided the 
criteria into the following four areas: 
                                                 
3  Collier, K, Carey, B, Sautter, D. and Marjaniemi, C. “A Methodology for Evaluating and Selecting data Mining 
Software,” Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 1999, IEEE. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.615 
• Performance : Performance refers to the ability to handle a variety of data sources.  
• Functionality : Functionality refers to the variety of capabilities, technical methods, and 
methodology for data mining included in the program.  
• Usability : Usability refers to the conformation of different levels and types of users 
without losing usefulness or functionality. 
• Support of ancillary activities : Ancillary task support permits the user to perform the variety 
of tasks that support data mining.  
 
Evaluating Data Mining Consultants 
If, however, an entity intends to use a data mining consultant, the following qualities should 
be assessed: 
• Innovation : How does the individual stay current? Look for professional associations, 
publications, and training in your area of investigation.  
• Creativity : Can the individual work in a creative environment, such as fraud intelligence? 
Can the individual work unsupervised and be expected to produce results? Since fraud is 
a moving target, how has a past client’s platfo rm altered from the original investigation? 
Why/how did that occur? What were the results?  
• Experience : Does the individual have experience in the type of investigation you are 
planning? Does the individual have experi ence in the type of software/tools you are 
planning to use? Does the individual have experience in the type of data you have? 
 
The embodiment of this expertise might take one, two, three, or more people. You really 
need people who understand what it is they are looking for—and what they can do with it 
once they find it. 
 
 
Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software 
There are many types of data mining and data analysis software on the market these days, 
and every year new products and new versions of old products emerge. Because every fraud 
examination involving data analysis is different, it would be impossible to recommend one 
software product to serve every purpose. Choosing a data analysis tool is something that the 
fraud examiner must evaluate on each individual case. A fraud examiner should research 
applications intensively to decide which package is most appropriate for the current 
investigation.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data mining and knowledge discovery software are generally classified into the following 
categories: 
• Public domain/shareware/freeware: This type of software is available free or for a 
nominal charge through websites, ftp sites, and newsgroups. Many shareware programs, 
such as WINKS SDA, allow users a trial period, after which they must pay a fee to 
reactivate the software. Freeware, however, is available at no cost or for an optional fee. 
These types of programs can be located through Internet search engines and through 
software download services such as ZDNet. 
• Beta software: Beta software is pre-release software that is still in test mode. Generally, 
this type of software is free, and users are asked to review the software’s performance, 
report malfunctions, and so on.  
• Commercial applications: Commercial applications are general release products that 
usually come with technical support and warranty. The most prominent commercial 
applications, which are discussed below, include: 
–  ACL 
–  IDEA 
–  Excel 
–  ActiveData for Excel 
–  AutoAudit 
–  SNAP! Reporter 
–  DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
–  Arbutus Query 
–  Oversight Systems 
 
ACL 
ACL is a generalized audit software program; it  is one of the preferred software tools of 
audit and financial professionals for data extraction, data analysis, fraud detection, and 
continuous monitoring. ACL provides a combinat ion of data access, analysis, and integrated 
reporting. It reads and compares enterprise data—flat or relational databases, spreadsheets, 
or report files on PCs or servers — allowing the source data to remain intact. ACL employs a 
single, consistent client interface and provides easy, immediate access to data.  
 
Commands are already pre-programmed for data analysis. Automate your analysis through 
continuous monitoring and real-time notification. 
 
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.617 
With ACL you can: 
• Analyze data independently from your IT department, with a user interface, pull-down 
menus, toolbars, and point-and-click commands 
• Analyze transactional data in files of any size to ensure 100-percent coverage and 
confidence in your results 
• Produce reports 
• Identify trends, pinpoint exceptions, and highlight potential areas of concern 
• Locate errors and potential fraud by comparing and analyzing files according to end- 
user criteria 
• Identify control issues and ensure compliance with standards 
 
For more information, visit www.acl.com.  
 
IDEA  
Like ACL, IDEA (Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis) is a generalized audit software 
program. More specifically, it is a PC-based file interrogation package that allows 
accountants, auditors, and financial managers to view, sample, and analyze data from any 
other computerized system. This software provides some functionality previously only 
available to electronic data processing (EDP) auditors and systems specialists. IDEA lets the 
user make inquiries of data files, perform random unit sampling, and calculate totals and 
averages. The software will perform specific criteria searches, unusual item queries, and 
identify gaps or duplicates in sequences. Additionally, to differentiate normal audit patterns 
from suspect ones, examiners can use IDEA to perform data analysis using Benford’s Law.  
 
Additionally, IDEA includes a number of tools to prevent and detect fraud, including 
personal vetting tools, the power to authorize transactions independently, and the ability to 
observe employees. This software considers purchasing, payroll, and banking the most 
common places for the occurrence of fraud. 
 
General Functions 
IDEA’s general functions are discussed below.  
 
FILES, FILE MANAGEMENT, AND FILE MANIPULATION 
IDEA’s file management and manipulation applications allow the user to import/export files 
from almost any format, including XML and specific accounting packages; use an easy, 
industry-standard file management program; generate a single database from several other 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
databases; use a compare-database option to identify differences in a numeric field within 
two files for a common key; combine fields from two databases into a single database to test 
for data matches across files; and use the append-databases option, concatenate two or more 
files into a single database for audit testing.  
 
DATA APPLICATIONS 
With IDEA’s data applications, users can exercise extraction or exception testing to identify 
items that satisfy a specific characteristic, The Equation Editor allows you to create simple or 
very complex extractions, and the @Functions are used to perform more complex 
calculations and exception testing. The Search function can seek text or numeric values 
across selected fields in multiple databases using standard or advanced search techniques. 
IDEA Duplicates can identify items within a database in which up to eight fields of 
information are the same. Users can also search for gaps in numeric sequence or 
alphanumeric sequences with a user-defined mask. The Chart Data option allows data files 
to be graphed or test results exhibited in bar, stacking bar, pie, plot, or area charts. Data 
Action Fields allow users to set up relationships across multiple files. 
 
SAMPLING 
IDEA offers five sampling methods with the ability to calculate sample sizes based on 
parameters entered and evaluate the results of sampling tests. The sampling methods 
available are systematic, random, stratified random, monetary unit, and classical variables 
sampling.  
 
ANALYSIS 
IDEA’s analysis applications allow users to apply Benford’s Law, stratification, 
summarization, aging, and pivot tables to raw data.  
 
PRODUCTIVITY 
With the productivity application, there are several different functions that can display the 
data, save the operations carried out on a database, generate statistics for all numeric and 
date fields within a database, and create a script with the help of object-oriented 
programming language. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.619 
Fraud Tests 
Fraud examiners and auditors can use IDEA’s data  analysis applications to identify potential 
signs of fraud. The following are a few examples of the types of fraud schemes that 
examiners can identify with IDEA’s data analyses applications.   
 
EMPLOYEE FRAUD 
• Identify employee accounts at financial institutions that have excess numbers of credit 
memos.  
• Identify employee accounts at financial institutions that have large deposits. 
• Compare employee home addresses, Social Security numbers, telephone numbers, and 
bank routing and account numbers to those of vendors from vendor master file. 
• At financial institutions, compare employee Social Security numbers against those of 
deposit and loan accounts to identify those not properly coded as employee accounts. 
• Analyze all debits to income accounts, particularly debit memos. 
• Monitor the activity in suspense accounts, including the age of suspense items and the 
rolling of similar amounts. 
• Analyze claims paid by corporate medical insurance providers. 
• Obtain a Social Security number listing from an outside vendor to test for valid Social 
Security numbers and determine whether the holder is alive or deceased. 
 
QUESTIONABLE INVOICES 
• Identify invoices without a valid purchase order. 
• Look for invoices from vendors not in the approved-vendor file. 
• Find invoices for more than one purchase order authorization. 
• Identify multiple invoices with the same item description. 
• Extract vendors with duplicate invoice numbers. 
• Look for multiple invoices for the same amount on the same date. 
• Find invoice payments issued on non-business days (Saturday and Sundays). 
• Identify multiple invoices at or just under approval cut-off levels. 
 
PHANTOM VENDOR SCHEMES 
• Match names, addresses, phone numbers,  and Social Security numbers between 
employee and vendor files. 
• Check vendor addresses against mail drop address lists. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.620   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KICKBACK OR CONFLICT OF INTEREST SCHEMES 
• Look for vendor prices greater than the standard. 
• Identify price increases greater than acceptable percentages. 
• Check for continued purchases in spite of high rates of returns, rejects, or credits. 
• Look for high volume purchases from one vendor. 
 
DORMANT ACCOUNT SCHEMES 
• Check that all applicable accounts have been flagged as dormant. 
• Identify dormant accounts with activity. 
• Check for transfers from dormant accounts to employee accounts. 
• Check changes of addresses on dormant accounts. Cross-check new addresses with 
employee addresses. 
 
MONEY LAUNDERING SCHEMES 
• Identify accounts with large average values of transactions. It is common for there to be 
a small number of high-value transactions through an account being used for money 
laundering. 
• Identify matched debit and credit transactions on the same account within a short time 
period.  
• Search for large, rounded transaction values. 
• Identify multiple accounts for particular individuals. 
• Identify large cash deposits. 
• Test customer identification procedures by searching for missing data fields, such as date 
of birth, Social Security number, or driver’s license number. 
• Cross check customer addresses against mail drop address lists. 
 
For more information about IDEA, visit www.audimation.com. 
 
Excel 
Excel is a spreadsheet program by Microsoft that can be used for storing, organizing and 
manipulating data. Many accountants, auditors, and fraud examiners use Excel for basic data 
analysis tasks. For example, Excel allows users to sort, subtotal, filter, and merge data. They 
can create calculated fields, as well as perform statistical analysis such as regression.  
 
Excel, however, has many limitations that limit its usefulness for detecting fraud. These 
limitations are discussed in the next section, which examines ActiveData for Excel. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.621 
ActiveData for Excel 
ActiveData for Microsoft Excel is an easy-to-use tool for advanced data manipulation and 
analysis within the Excel environment. 
 
ActiveData for Excel was designed to overcome Excel’s many limitations: 
 
Excel Limitation ActiveData for Excel’s Compensation  
Does not document the fraud 
examiner’s work in easy-to-access 
logs for reference and storage. 
ActiveData for Excel provides a log of each 
processed step (as a comment in cell A1 of the 
worksheet created). Then, using the Index Sheets 
function, a summary page of all comment fields 
can easily be created for review, in essence 
creating an audit log of all work performed with 
the spreadsheet data. 
Has difficulty performing data-
 analysis and management tests such 
as relating tables. Although it can be 
accomplished, it is an onerous task. 
ActiveData for Excel provides more than 100 
data-analysis and management features that 
automate functions, some of which may be 
possible but extremely difficult in Excel. 
Does not have functionality 
specifically tailored to the fraud 
examiner. For example, an examiner 
can calculate a sample in just a couple 
of clicks with minimal training using 
specifically designed audit software. 
In Excel, it can be done, but it does 
take much effort and guidance. 
ActiveData for Excel has more than 100 features 
that are tailored to the auditor, accountant, and 
fraud examiner. For example, you can use 
ActiveData for Excel to find duplicate records in 
a few clicks (rather than setting up complex 
formulas in Excel). 
 
The following are some examples of how ActiveData can be used for fraud detection. 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for Accounts Payable 
VENDOR SUMMARY TOTALS PERIOD ONE TO PERIOD TWO COMPARISON 
This is a basic analytical report to identify trends in a vendor’s purchase history. A trend 
analysis should be completed to identify key vendors with whom activity has increased or 
decreased substantially. This can best be assessed using the dollar and percentage variance 
fields, which can be added as calculated fields in Excel. Based on the changes in the business 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.622   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
environment and/or new company projects, a reasonableness assessment should be 
performed on the vendor changes. 
 
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS/BENFORD’S LAW ANALYSIS 
Descriptive statistics provide maximum amount, minimum amount, average amount, and 
other high-level statistics. These statistics should be reviewed for reasonableness; for 
example, a high number of negative amounts or a maximum amount that looks too high 
might not be reasonable. 
 
After obtaining the descriptive statistics of a data set, the software provides a Benford’s Law 
analysis of the first two digits of the data, as well as a list of all amounts from highest to 
lowest frequency, for review.  
 
To review, Benford’s Law distinguishes between natural and non-natural numbers. Natural 
numbers  are those numbers that are not ordered in a particular numbering scheme and are not 
generated from a random number system. For example, most accounts payable files will be 
populated by dollar values that are natural numbers. Conversely, non-natural numbers  like 
Social Security numbers and telephone numbers are designed systematically to convey 
information that restricts the natural nature of the number. 
 
Benford’s Law provides that the distribution of the initial digits in natural numbers is not 
random; instead, it follows a predictable pattern. The table below shows the expected 
occurrence for the distribution of the first digit in natural numbers, according to this law: 
 
First Digit Probability
 1 30.1%
 2 17.6%
 3 12.5%
 4 9.7%
 5 7.9%
 6 6.7%
 7 5.8%
 8 5.1%
 9 4.6%
 Total 100.0%
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.623 
That is, Benford’s Law maintains that certain di gits show up more than others do. A “1” will 
appear as the first non-zero digit roughly 30 percent of the time; “2” will be the leading digit 
almost 18 percent of the time; “9” will lead o ff only 4.6 percent of the time. Moreover, zero 
is most likely to be the second digit, appearing 12 percent of the time.  
 
Benford’s Law makes it possible to detect fraudulent numbers in large data files by 
comparing the frequency of the appearance of initial digits in a list of numbers to those 
anticipated by Benford’s Law. For example, when embezzlers invent numbers, they tend to 
fake data containing too many instances of initial digits of “7,” “8,” and “9” and too few 
instances of “1,” “2,” and “3.” Thus, with Benford’s Law, examiners can tell if someone 
fakes data that are derived from other data, and they can also identify errors within the data 
that appear “out of place” given the data’s frequency of appearance. 
 
The Benford’s Law analysis should be executed first so the most statistical outliers can be 
reviewed.  
 
Furthermore, as a follow up to these tests, examiners should use a Query Sheet to query 
outlier activity for additional review. 
 
ABOVE-AVERAGE PAYMENTS TO A VENDOR (MORE THAN TWO TIMES THE AVERAGE) 
Unusually large payments to a vendor in relation to the average are a sign of error (e.g., a 
key-punch error) or fraud (e.g., a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid additional 
amounts that are kicked-back to the employee entering the payment into the system). 
 
For vendors with unusual payments above the average, a sample of the “average” payment 
invoices, as well as the unusual payment invoices should be reviewed. The reasonableness of 
the purchase should be assessed based on the documentation reviewed. The auditor should 
be keenly aware of the potential for a key-punch error regarding the unusual payment 
and/or the possibility of the vendor purposely overcharging the organization. 
 
DUPLICATE PAYMENT TESTING  
Duplicate payments to vendors normally represent errors that the computer system was 
unable to detect. In most systems, a check will be made as to whether the vendor number, 
invoice number, and amount are the same. This test could be run to ensure this basic control 
is operational and also to test for other permutations of duplication. Any results from this 
test should be reviewed first for trends. For example, rent payments that occur on a monthly 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
basis may appear to be duplicate payments when, in fact, they are simply regularly occurring 
payments. Note also that certain accounting packages allow the issuance of partial payments 
(e.g., a payment to the same vendor with the same invoice number and amount). Therefore, 
the auditor should determine whether the system allows such payments and, if so, omit them 
prior to running this application. 
 
Voided checks should also be reviewed; if a payment is made first on a regular check and 
then on a voided one, only one payment was technically made. 
 
EMPLOYEE-TO-VENDOR ADDRESS MATCH 
This test identifies identical or similar fields between the master tables of vendors and 
employees in an attempt to identify fraudulent payments to employees. While this test 
explains how to complete this task for addresses, the same could be done for phone 
numbers, tax identification numbers, and other personal information. 
 
Once the results are produced, the auditor should  scan them to determine if there are any 
valid address matches between the employee and vendor tables. As a next step, a Query 
Sheet could be created of the actual invoices posted to any questionable vendor to determine 
if they are fraudulent. Two notes when completing this review are: 
• Because this exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or 
vendor information independent of the accounts payable department (who may be 
culpable for creating the false vendor account). 
• Because it is common to pay employee travel and entertainment expenses or employee 
advances, this should be the key reason to not consider the payments fraudulent. If 
possible, the vendor file should be filtered for all employee travel and entertainment 
vendor accounts prior to running this test. 
 
IDENTIFYING PAYMENTS MADE AFTER PERIOD END FOR VALID LIABILITIES AT PERIOD END 
This report works to identify unrecorded liabilities. A common scheme is for an  
organization to “hold” an invoice by not enterin g it into the system. Then, after period end, 
the invoice will be entered into the system, thereby evading the expense charge in the period 
under review. 
 
The invoices identified in this test should be reviewed for reasonableness and materiality. If 
not material, further test work may not be considered necessary. If material, trends may be 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.625 
identified in the types of invoices or the vendor. The final analysis should include pulling the 
actual invoices to determine whether they are for services rendered or products received 
before the period end. 
 
IDENTIFY EXCEEDED PURCHASE ORDERS 
This report works to identify authorization issues within an accounts payable process 
whereby the invoices paid exceed the approved purchase order amounts. Aside from 
assessing the authorized limits, this report tests the system control that should not allow an 
invoice to be paid above a predetermined limit (normally between 5 and 10 percent). 
The report may also highlight frauds: 
• In which a valid purchase order is provided to authorize payment, yet inflated payments 
are made to assist the fraudster in some way. 
• In which vendors working with an employee create a purchase order with valid unit 
prices, yet inflate those prices when the invoices are sent. 
 
This test may highlight a control issue within the computer system (which should check for 
exceeded purchase orders), or it may identify numerous overrides to the computer system. 
These overrides may be within the normal course of business (e.g., purchase order prices 
were meant to be at the invoice price rate, but were entered in error on the purchase order), 
but may also highlight fraudulent activity. Regardless, the auditor should walk through the 
process of entering a purchase order and associated invoices to understand the system 
controls. Once understood, the differences presented in this test can be investigated by 
vouching to purchase order and invoice documentation. 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for the General Ledger 
STRATIFY GENERAL LEDGER DETAIL INFORMATION 
Look at the multitude of activities in a gene ral ledger and ask yourself, “How can I survey 
this data in an extremely quick manner while efficiently planning my audit?” This test should 
provide the answer because it helps the auditor focus on large-dollar postings, while 
assessing the administrative burden of maintaining low-dollar activity. 
 
The stratification report should be reviewed for: 
• Unreasonably large balances for which the activity could be queried for recalculation and 
proper classification 
• A high number of transactions with low accumulated activity for possible consolidation 
• Planning detailed testing of the journal entry approval process 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.626   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
JOURNAL ENTRY GAP TESTS 
Gaps may signal incomplete data processing or, in the situation of journal entries, possible 
hidden entries. Usually, a method of documenting these occurrences, along with a review by 
an independent party, is sufficient to ensure the completeness and accuracy of processing. 
However, it is rare that a journal entry gap test is performed in the accounting department (it 
is more common in the accounts payable area related to the check sequence), so this may be 
the first time this test is being performed. 
 
Gaps in the journal entry sequence should be reviewed with the accounting department. The 
test work should answer the following questions: 
• What procedures are in place to document and approve all gaps in the sequences? 
• How are gaps communicated to management? 
 
IDENTIFY NONSTANDARD JOURNAL ENTRIES MADE IN A TIMEFRAME AFTER YEAR 
END RELATED TO SPECIFIC ACCOUNTS 
Nonstandard journal entries are generally those that are posted manually, rather than 
through an automated feed from a fixed asset or accounts receivable sub-ledger. Such entries 
are more prone to error and fraud mainly due to human error, the judgment applied to 
support the entry, and the possibility of an override by management in authorizing the entry. 
This is especially true for entries made just after year end (related to the prior year), as these 
entries are more prone to be adjustments for the fiscal year’s annual reporting. 
 
Given the above, the test for these entries should include: 
• Reviewing the journal entry and associated supporting documentation 
• Ensuring the approvals are appropriate for the size and nature of the journal entry 
• Assessing whether generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) are being applied 
 
SUMMARIZE ACTIVITY BY USER ACCOUNT 
This test looks for: 
• Standard names such as “default” or “test.” These names usually have equally simple 
passwords for a hacker to guess and should generally be avoided. Replacements to these 
generic user IDs would be specific IDs associated with the person using the system (e.g., 
“jsmith”). 
• Unrecognized or terminated employees. This test focuses on the responsiveness within 
the MIS function to ensure that only authorized employees have system access. Compare 
the list created by this test to an active employee roster to spot any violations. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.627 
• Users who have access beyond their level of responsibility. This access may highlight a 
nonsegregation of duties in which a person has an opportunity to commit fraud by being 
able to initiate, authorize, and/or record a transaction. 
 
The resulting report should be reviewed bearing in mind the above considerations. 
Recommended steps include: 
• Delete default passwords and replace them with specific IDs 
• Delete employees who are not on the active employee roster 
• Review users who are posting high activity or who may have access to other non-
 segregated functions and assess whether other controls are needed to mitigate the such 
individuals’ access 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for Revenue 
MISSING/UNUSUAL CUSTOMER  MASTERFILE INFORMATION/MATCH TO PRIOR YEAR 
FOR CHANGES 
This report will identify changes in the customer masterfile, such as additions and deletions. 
Given that most systems do not track the changes in the customer masterfile (e.g., there is 
no “Last Maintained on Date” field), this report is sometimes the only means of determining 
changes in the customer master.  
 
The fraud examiner should review major additions and/or deletions to the customer 
masterfile. Given that there is a high potential for fraud on newly added customers (e.g., 
posting false sales invoices to phony customer accounts to inflate period-end sales balances), 
the names and addresses for such customers should be reviewed against employees with the 
ability to enter invoices into the system. This can be done using the accounts payable test 
described in this book that matched vendor addresses to employee addresses. Since this 
exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or customer files 
independent of the accounts receivable department (which may be culpable for creating the 
false customer accounts). 
 
CASH RECEIPT TO OPEN INVOICE MATCHING 
This test helps assess the existence and valuation of open invoices at period end based on 
the cash received subsequent to year end. Therefore, it is one of the most popular tests used 
by fraud examiners in assessing the existence of period end invoices. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.628   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Based on this test, the fraud examiner can easily assess whether open invoices were paid with 
cash (and therefore existed at year end), and for those still outstanding, whether they should 
be reviewed further from the perspective of year-end valuation. Such invoices probably 
relate to customers who regularly pay late, but they could represent new customer payment 
issues and/or fraudulent sales posted at year-end that will never receive cash. 
 
AGE RECEIVABLES, EXTRACT OLDER BALANCES, AND SUMMARIZE BY CUSTOMER 
This test mainly recalculates the aging of the invoices in the accounts receivable ledger for 
review against the company-derived report. Any differences between this calculation and the 
report used by management may be due to a system error, a poorly designed report, or fraud. 
To orchestrate fraud, management may hide the true payment patterns of customers to 
minimize their bad debt valuation reserve at year end. 
 
The aging report should be reconciled to the organization’s accounts receivable aging report. 
Any differences should be investigated. One approach is to extract a sampling of invoices 
(see previous test on reviewing a sample of invoices) within a specific aging group and 
reconcile to the aging report on an invoice by invoice basis. This work may identify report 
errors or an attempt by the organization to hide the true aging of accounts receivable.  
The focus of test work should be on more current aging categories that may be 
inappropriately inflated. 
 
Once the invoices are summarized by customer, the aging report also highlights customer 
balances, older than a pre-defined “old” limit. This may be 180 or 270 days after which 
payment of such invoices is unlikely. Large customer balances could be reviewed with 
management as to their collectability and, possibly, with the actual customer. This analysis 
would further support the year-end bad debt reserve calculation. 
 
CALCULATE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHIP AND INVOICE DATES, AS WELL AS INVOICE DATES WITH NO SHIPMENTS 
Untimely, erroneous, and/or fraudulent sales invoices may be detected if invoices are sent 
without valid shipments. In this case, revenue is potentially being recorded prior to being 
earned. Further research of these invoices should be done independent of the sales and 
accounts receivable functions in order to ensure an independent analysis. 
 
For more information about ActiveData for Excel, visit www.informationactive.com. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.629 
AutoAudit 
AutoAudit is a comprehensive, integrated audit automation system. In addition to the 
workpapers and reporting functionality, AutoAudit has entity-level and process-level risk 
assessment, staff scheduling, resource planning, issue tracking, time reporting, expense 
reporting, quality assurance, department metrics, and an ad hoc reporting module. All of 
these modules are integrated, and data automatically flows from one module into the next. 
AutoAudit is designed to automate all of the primary processes that occur in an audit 
department.  
 
Although AutoAudit automates many parts of any type of audit, of particular interest to 
fraud examiners are its risk assessment functions. AutoAudit offers an integrated risk 
assessment module with the option of following a horizontal methodology (business process 
risk assessment), a vertical methodology (audit universe made up of user-defined auditable 
entities), or a combination of both methodologies. Specific risks and processes are identified 
by the client, and the risk factors and weights can be customized to fit the specific needs of 
the department and industry. Information about the inherent and residual risks helps 
determine issues during the audit, and the information obtained during fieldwork can be 
pushed back into the risk assessment to use as the starting point for the next cycle of 
planning and auditing. 
 
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 
SNAP! Reporter 
Snap! Reporter is a data mining software program designed for use with Lotus Notes, 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, and Access databases.  Its chief virtue is its ease of use. Most 
software requires a familiarity with databases and data mining techniques, but anyone with 
basic spreadsheet skills can produce reports and graphics with this product. In Snap!, data 
retrieval and analysis are automated with one-button functions; some tasks are accomplished 
by drag-and-drop.  
 
Snap! produces Gantt Charts (i.e., graphical representations of projects) and counts 
occurrences of key words rather than only charting actual numbers. The software also 
creates stacked non-columnar reports and generates multiple Relationized Data Sets from 
one originating record—functions not available in other products. Snap! is not as powerful 
as some other data mining software, but it is easier to use. It is adequate to most tasks, 
though some complex cases may need a stronger package. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 
DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
Monarch is report-mining software. Monarch is unique because it extracts data from existing 
reports created by other programs, and then converts the data into actionable data (e.g., text 
files, spreadsheets, or database tables). For example, electronic data that is retrieved from an 
accounting system, or downloaded from an online source, can be broken down into 
individual records by Monarch’s model. Monarch can read report files produced on any 
mainframe, midrange, client/server, or PC system. These files are commonly known as print 
files, spool files, TXT files, formatted ASCII files, PRN files, and SDF files. Monarch can 
also read DBF files and delimited ASCII files.  
 
Once the data is actionable, it can be analyzed. That is, the records can be manipulated by 
data analysis applications like Access and Excel. 
 
Monarch specializes in reading complex reports in ASCII (plain text) format. Its data mining 
capabilities are useful for data integrity testing. Monarch can be used by itself or in tandem 
with other audit software such as ACL., but it will provide the most benefit when used in 
conjunction with another data analysis tool. 
 
Monarch serves three main functions for investigators: 
• Performs automated auditing tests and tests of various program controls 
• Verifies data on management or exter nal party report-generation accuracy 
• Proactively identifies errors and fraudulent activity 
 
Moreover, examiners can use Monarch to perform several functions in a financial analysis or  
risk assessment: 
• Summary window: To summarize information by a different criteria than the report did 
• Sorting data within the Table window: To generate an alphabetically sorted list or to identify 
the largest or smallest transactions 
• Time series analysis : To compile information from 12 separate reports into a month-by-
 month summary, allowing the investigator to identify trends 
• Graphing data within the Summary window : To graph any information in the Summary 
window into a pie, area, line, or bar chart quickly to visualize composition, trends, or 
distribution (this chart function is much more straightforward than in spreadsheet 
programs, such as MS Excel and Lotus 1-2-3) 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.631 
• Create calculated fields: To perform custom calculations on ex isting data fields or new fields 
not present in the original file 
 
Here are a few practical examples of Monarch’s investigative capabilities. The software 
allows investigators to: 
• View the 20 largest vendors by invoice am ount to compare the amounts with their 
expectations of those amounts 
• Summarize by purchase order number to determine if the sum of all transactions related 
to a purchase order exceed the amount authorized by the purchase order 
• Measure transaction volume and amount processed by each input clerk to identify 
unusual activity 
• Compare budget versus actual figures by computing a difference field 
• Chart customer delinquency trends for the past 12 months 
 
For more information about Monarch, visit www.datawatch.com. 
 
Arbutus Query 
Arbutus Query is a comprehensive query tool with built-in data-analysis capabilities. With 
Arbutus Query, users are able to query a wide range of data sources without having to know 
the location or structure of the underlying data. Arbutus Query employs Arbutus Analyzer to 
provide direct, read-only queries of data. Arbutus Analyzer uses a familiar spreadsheet 
interface to browse, analyze, or report on the data. The software can handle unlimited file 
sizes and has powerful data analysis and manipulation commands that support even the most 
advanced tasks.  
 
For more information on the Arbutus programs, visit www.arbutussoftware.com. 
 
Oversight Systems 
Oversight Systems offers software that helps businesses check for fraud, errors, and other 
problems. Its software provides continuous monitoring and continuous auditing with 
investigation, resolution, and tracking capabilities for continuous protection against fraud, 
misuse, and errors in business transactions. Oversight’s products also identify errors and 
control violations as they happen, so companies can address these issues when they are less 
complex and less costly to correct. Oversight’s products include features that integrate 
investigation, reconciliation, and documentation of data. For more information, visit 
www.oversightsystems.com. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.632   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting and Case Management Software 
There are a number of programs that can assist the fraud examiner in managing the data and 
information gathered. These programs can also be used to create reports, graphs, and charts 
of a particular case. Some of the most useful of these programs for fraud investigations are 
discussed below. 
 
i2’s Analysis Product Line 
i2 offers a line of analytical tools that allow users to search, store, visualize and analyze data. 
Some of those tools are discussed below.  
 
Analyst’s Notebook 
i2 Inc. offers a professional visualization and analysis tool called Analyst’s Notebook. 
Analyst’s Notebook is a visual investigative analys is software program that brings clarity to 
complex investigations and intelligence analysis. It enables investigators and analysts to turn 
large volumes of disparate data into actionable intelligence. It creates charts and graphs to 
allow users to:  
• Visualize large volumes of investigative data to understand the big picture. 
• Reveal patterns and hidden connections to help focus the investigation. 
• Create analytical charts manually or automatically generate link and timeline charts from 
structured data. 
• Communicate complex cases with intuitive briefing charts that capture and organize 
supporting data. 
 
iBase 
iBase is i2’s investigative database that is. It allows users to configure a data store, capture 
data, and perform data analysis in a controlled environment.  
 
Data Miner 
Data Miner is a data mining application that can only be installed with Analyst’s 
Workstation. It allows users to analyze large amounts of data and find any patterns that may 
exist.  
 
Analyst’s Workstation 
Analyst’s Workstation is an integrated collection of analytical tools, including Analyst's 
Notebook, iBase, and Data Miner. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.633 
For more information on i2’s product line, visit www.i2inc.com. 
 
CaseMap by CaseSoft 
CaseMap is a case analysis tool that makes it easy to organize, evaluate, and explore the facts, 
characters, and issues in a case. It is designed for use on all types of cases and by all types of 
litigators and investigators. CaseMap software integrates with numerous other litigation-support 
and electronic-discovery tools, including Adobe Acrobat, Applied Discovery, 
Binder, Concordance, JFS Litigator’s Notebook, KPMG’s Discovery Radar, LiveNote, and 
Sanction. 
 
Spreadsheets 
When a CaseMap file is created, the program auto matically sets up a series of spreadsheets 
used to organize critical case knowledge. These spreadsheets can be used to organize 
information about the facts, documents, characters, issues, and case law in every case.  
 
 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.634   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.635 
FACTS SPREADSHEET 
The facts spreadsheets include a case chronology in which the investigator can enter facts, 
dates, times, and the source of each piece of information. Investigators can also distinguish 
between disputed and undisputed facts and keep track of the status of each item. 
 
 
 
OBJECTS SPREADSHEET 
The objects spreadsheet allows investigators to organize the cast of characters—a list of the 
individuals and organizations involved in the case, and it should also catalog key documents 
and other important pieces of physical evidence.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.636   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
ISSUE SPREADSHEET 
The issue spreadsheet provides an outline of the issues, including both legal claims and 
critical factual disputes. The outline can be any number of levels deep.  
 
QUESTION SPREADSHEET 
Because many questions occur during the early stages of an investigation, the question 
spreadsheet allows users to filter and sort their open items using various criteria.  
 
RESEARCH SPREADSHEETS 
CaseMap has three research spreadsheets: Authorities, Extracts from Authorities and a 
combination of Authorities and Extracts. The research spreadsheets will organize and 
explore the user’s knowledge about the precedents and statutes relevant to their case, and it 
include links to actual case law using the authorities and extracts. The authorities spreadsheet 
can be used to manage top-level information about precedents, statutes, and other types of 
case research. The extracts spreadsheet can be used to capture details about particular 
sections of interest excerpted from important case law and statutes.  
 
Linking 
CaseMap also provides the ability to link pieces  of data in one spreadsheet with the source 
data or other relevant data in another sheet. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.637 
 
 
Filtering 
Once information is organized, CaseMap users can explore it. The most powerful case-exploration 
tool in CaseMap is the filtering function. A filter operation limits the rows that 
appear in a spreadsheet and on your printed report to those that meet criteria you specify.  
 
 
 
For more information, visit www.casesoft.com. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.638   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Actimize Enterprise Risk Case Manager 
Actimize Enterprise Risk Case Manager is case managements software that empowers 
companies to address enterprise-wide risk and compliance management. It is designed to 
help companies detect and react to fraud attacks more efficiently by consolidating all fraud 
and compliance issues into a central location. According to Actimize, the Risk Case Manager 
supports risk operations with workflow management, evidence collection, and 
documentation, and as a result, it allows users to: 
• Improve risk and compliance operations 
• Detect more issues; reduce risk, losses, and fines 
• Enable efficient and collaborative investigations 
• Reduce IT and operational costs 
 
Xanalys Suite 
Xanalys offers a suite of case management software applications to help users collect, 
manage, analyze, and share investigative intelligence. It offers three products: PowerCase, 
Link Explorer, and Indexer.  
 
PowerCase 
PowerCase provides an end-to-end platform for conducting large-scale investigations. It 
manages all aspects of an investigation team’s activities through the entire investigative 
process by providing the following functionality: 
• Provides centralized data storage 
• Establishes a document workflow to ensure that all evidence is examined a reviewed 
• Checks new case information against existing data for commonalities and associations 
• Assigns and tracks lines of investigation  
• Provides a range of search features 
• Allows users to visualize case data 
• Generates a complete audit trail of all user activity within the system 
 
Link Explorer 
Link Explorer allows users to construct database queries in natural, everyday language and 
displays the results in graphic form. Simply ask a question by dragging and dropping icons 
onto a query screen. Xanalys Link Explorer then  generates easy-to-read interactive charts 
that map how people, events, telephone calls, e-mail messages, and other case details are 
linked. As new information arrives, the displays are instantly updated. Information can be 
viewed in a variety of ways. In addition to powerful link analysis charts, Link Explorer can 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.639 
display results in numerous other formats, including a report, a timeline with events 
organized in a chronological order, or a hierarchy chart showing relationships among people. 
Link Explorer offers several methods to import,  enter, merge, or modify data, as well as to 
create new objects and links. These include a text importer, flexible data importer, data entry 
forms, QuickChart toolbox, and object cards.  
 
 
 
Indexer 
Indexer is a text extraction program that clearly and automatically reveals critical connections 
between information stored in a database. Indexer automatically extracts relevant 
information from unstructured text using entities (such as a person, company, or an event), 
attributes (such as occupation, sex, or company title), and relationships (such as located at, 
works for, and involved in event). Xanalys provides various ways to ensure that the 
information represented in the Index Plan is useful. These include loading them into a 
database for analysis by Link Explorer or other reporting or analysis tools, in addition to 
embedding the technology into third-party applications. With the key entities and 
relationships contained in a structured environment, it is now possible to access and query 
this information. Once a number of documents have been processed, a list of all the people 
mentioned in the documents or a list of companies, vehicles, or phone numbers associated 
with those listed people could be obtained. As new documents arrive, these can be 
incorporated and augment the existing results. The full power of Indexer capabilities can be 
embedded into a company’s own products and technologies. On the Windows platform, it 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.640   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
includes a COM interface to direct the information extraction output into any required form, 
such as input to some other process or to a database. 
 
For more information on Link Explorer or Indexer, visit www.xanalys.com.  
 
Enterprise Investigation Management 
Norkom Technologies’s Enterprise Investigation Management software is case management 
software for anti-money laundering and fraud investigations. It links information from 
multiple insider sources like foreign travel reporting databases and debriefings, employee 
security background information, network logs, and cyber activity logs to compose a picture 
of potential insider security threats. This composite approach puts otherwise disconnected 
pieces of information in context to help prevent sensitive information and capabilities from 
being compromised. For more information on Enterprise Investigation Management visit 
www.norkom.com. 
 
Multi-Channel Fraud 
Norkom Technology’s multi-channel fraud management solution provides an end-to-end 
fraud solution — from advanced detection to investigation, response, and recovery — and is 
built on Norkom’s unique, configurable financial crime and compliance platform, which 
enables users to customize the technology as their needs change and new fraud techniques 
emerge. Norkom’s sophisticated detection analytics are optimized to detect a wide range of 
fraud, including plastic fraud, applications fraud, check fraud, deposit fraud, sleeper fraud, 
electronic banking fraud, phishing, internal fraud, insurance fraud, account takeover, and 
identity theft. The solution provides fraud detection by uniting the analytical power of 
specialized techniques, including pre-defined fraud detection scenarios, in-depth behavioral 
and peer group profiling, unusualness analytics, predictive modeling, and network analytics. 
For more information on Multi-Channel Fraud visit www.norkom.com. 
 
i-Sight Case Management Software 
i-Sight Case Management Software is a type of case management software for investigations, 
complaints, corrective and preventive action management, and other business processes that 
require case management. It allows users to record investigation notes, create and assign 
tasks with due dates and reminders, send e-mails from within a case record, use template 
letters, record investigative findings, record investigative resolutions, create follow-up tasks, 
track time and costs, effectuate corrective actions, keep an audit trail, and attach documents.  
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.641 
EthicsPoint Issue and Event Manager 
EthicsPoint provides hotline and anti-fraud reporting and case management services. Its 
Issue and Event Manager helps businesses ma nage reported issues (e.g., HR management 
issues, work-related injuries, security investigations, conflict of interest, competitor 
misconduct, any code of conduct violation, etc.). EthicsPoint’s offers web report forms to 
help streamline issues documentation, providing management with a reporting mechanism 
that automatically integrates an entity’s re ported data within a centralized database.  
 
 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.701 



:


data analysi and report tool
in todai world comput ar an integr part of fraud examin whether us the
internet in an investig or to analyz data it is essenti that the fraud examin have
access to a comput and it applic comput contain volum of datafinanci
data market data custom data correspond and more and evid of fraud could
be locat within that data unfortun fraudul data often look like legitim data
when view in the raw take a sampl and test it mai not uncov fraudul activ
fortun for fraud examin softwar compani have develop comput program
that enabl user to sift through mound of inform these program identifi current
custom potenti custom and futur trend within their respect industri and can
be configur to identifi break in audit control program and anomali in account
record
in gener these softwar program perform two primari function that fraud examin us
to explor and analyz larg amount of data data mine and data analyt data mine is
the scienc of extract inform from larg data set or databas data analysi refer to
ani statist process us to analyz data and if properli us these process can provid
the ultim system of red flag detect a fraudul situat long befor previous
possibl
data mine
data mine ha root in statist machin learn data manag and databas
pattern recognit and artifici intellig all of these ar concern with certain aspect
of data analysi so thei have much in common yet thei each have a distinct and individu
flavor emphas particular problem and type of solut
data mine ha great potenti to help organ shift their energi and focu to the
most import inform in their databas data mine tool comb databas for
obscur pattern find predict inform that even expert mai not recogn
us data mine technolog compani can evalu a plethora of inform spot
pattern in their market and busi procedur
data analysi and report tool investig
3602 2011 fraud examin manual
although data mine technolog provid kei advantag to market and busi
activ thei can also manipul financi data that wa previous hidden within a
compani databas enabl fraud examin to detect potenti fraud
previous the datamin process requir a comput programm to overse the
process howev thi is no longer necessari the current method us a comput and
comput softwar to assist in the datamin process data mine softwar provid an
easi to us computer process that give the fraud examin the abil to get to data at a
requir level of detail
data mine combin sever differ techniqu essenti to detect fraud includ the
streamlin of raw data into understand pattern
data mine can also help prevent fraud befor it happen for exampl spss busi
intellig a consult group for busi in electron commerc report that some of
their custom us data mine tool and applic to develop antifraud model that
score transact in realtim the score is custom for each busi involv
factor such as local of the order frequenc of the order payment histori and other
factor onc a transact is assign a highrisk score the merchant can decid whether to
accept the transact deni it or investig further
data mine is an effect wai for fraud examin to develop fraud target for further
investig it can mine databas for variou fraud indic such as 1 specif type of
transact 2 pattern within the data or 3 a relationship between two data field that
should not have a relationship eg the same address or telephon number for compani
with differ name target ar then examin to develop an investig strategi
involv site visit and facetofac interview data mine can also be refin base on
interview of target
on of the most sophist us of data mine is known as comput match also call
data match in australia and canada thi approach involv the comparison of two
discreet data set to identifi question overlap
but befor appli data mine process it is import to identifi the sourc from which
the data will be collect data mai be store in ani of the follow locat
mainfram softwar
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3603
laptop instal softwar
secur system softwar
hand held devic issu by the compani employe eg smart phone thumb drive
inventori scan equip etc
compani vehicl gp system
telephon system
time card system
kei card access
often compani us data warehous to manag data for analysi data warehous ar
repositori of a compani electron data design to facilit report and analysi by
store data in a data warehous data user can queri and analyz relev data store in a
singl locat thu a compani with a data warehous can perform variou type of
analyt oper eg identifi red flag transact trend pattern or anomali to
assist manag with it decisionmak respons
although thi section focus on electron data examin should also identifi manual
gener data such as
visitor checkin log
appoint log or individu calendar
custom receipt for cash payment
return merchandis slip
ani manual maintain list
after the examin ha identifi the data sourc he should identifi how the inform is
store thi mean review the databas schema and technic document which
should allow the investig to determin how inform is store on must be readi to
face a number of pitfal when attempt to identifi how inform is store from weak
or nonexist document to limit collabor from the it depart
moreov onc collect it is critic to ensur that the data is complet and appropri for
the analysi to be perform depend on how the data wa collect and process it
could requir some scrub to make it usabl for analysi purpos it mai be necessari to
modifi certain field format eg date time currenc etc to make the inform usabl
data analysi and report tool investig
3604 2011 fraud examin manual
data analysi
onc data ha been extract us data mine techniqu it must be analyz while data
analysi is us mainli as an audit techniqu it can be an import part of the fraud
detect toolkit although it cannot be us as evid that a fraud wa commit or that
a specif individu wa involv it can serv to identifi red flag associ with a wide
varieti of fraud it will therebi provid investig with a trail to follow
us data analysi softwar
advantag of us data analysi softwar
there ar five signific advantag to us data analysi softwar first data analysi
softwar allow the fraud examin to central an investig reli less on other to
gather pertin inform becaus of the amount of inform data mine softwar is
abl to sort through the examin no longer ha to reli on differ sourc for inform
in the past when analyz a compani book for possibl discrep the examin
would have to ask for the assist of sever person within the account depart to
locat the pertin inform now howev the data analysi program will do all the
leg work ensur an abovetheboard investig without mani variabl
second data analysi softwar allow the fraud examin to ensur that an investig is
accur and complet in the past an audit or fraud examin could onli be complet to
the extent that the investig wa abl to sift through inform when look at on
month worth of a compani transact a fraud examin might be forc to research
more than on million transact given the amount of time an auditor gener ha to
conduct a singl examin the depth of a manual audit can be suspect at best by us a
data analysi program the fraud examin can run sever differ analysi pattern in a
matter of hour enabl him to look at greater volum of inform from a number of
differ angl these procedur lead to a more comprehens examin
third data analysi allow the fraud examin to base predict about the probabl of a
fraudul situat on reliabl statist inform by util data mine softwar the
fraud examin can base ani strong suspicion of fraudul activ on hard number
becaus the softwar will compar on month expenditur with the same data for the rest
of the month of the year the fraud examin can point conclus to troubl area with
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3605
hard data to support a fraud examin suspicion a compani is more like to conduct
further investig into the wrongdo
fourth data analysi allow the fraud examin to search entir data file for red flag of
possibl fraud the number of checkpoint a fraud examin can set up us a data analysi
program is stagger by cut down on the paperwork involv in an investig the
fraud examin is abl to execut a number of differ search and analys of the
compani raw data
final data analysi can assist the fraud examin in develop refer file for ongo
fraud detect and investig work by perform audit and examin with data
analysi softwar the fraud examin will begin to recogn trend and set up a list of
preced for individu account situat such as a monthli statement reconcili
in do so the fraud examin can establish a norm with which to compar individu
month or year these preced can also be us by the fraud examin in gener term
and the knowledg can be appli to nearli ani fraud investig
core data analysi softwar function
comput can scan databas inform for sever specif type of inform creat
a redflag system to perform thi most softwar packag us a combin of differ
function these function ar
sort
record select
join file
multifil process
correl analysi
verifi multipl of a number
complianc verif
duplic search
vertic ratio analysi
horizont ratio analysi
date function
graph
data analysi and report tool investig
3606 2011 fraud examin manual
sort
to sort mean to arrang data in a meaning order sort is noth new most report
you read ar sort in some wai with sort data you can quickli pick out what is
import an investig can ask a program to sort inform us differ method
such as alphabet or numer for instanc when search for a suspect
fraudster name out of thousand in a check disburs file the softwar can quickli sort
a list of paye name
sampl custom sale data
date invoic custom amount
5410 m3158001 j789889 1250000
7510 m5958256 q189425 1458000
8910 m8897158 t681897 3888900
72509 m1569897 t888971 8756956
122010 m3158001 p123089 1250000
1810 m2098159 w555258 5634723
data sort by invoic number
date invoic custom amount
72509 m1569897 t888971 8756956
1810 m2098159 w555258 5634723
5410 m3158001 j789889 1250000
122010 m3158001 p123089 1250000
7510 m5958256 q189425 1458000
8910 m8897158 t681897 3888900
data sort by amount
date invoic custom amount
5410 m3158001 j789889 1250000
122010 m3158001 p123089 1250000
7510 m5958256 q189425 1458000
8910 m8897158 t681897 3888900
1810 m2098159 w555258 5634723
72509 m1569897 t8 88971 8756956
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3607
record select
specif record select is accomplish by a request or queri of the comput to find the
occurr of item or record in a field thi type of request will onli return instanc
where the record did occur effect reduc larg amount of inform into concis
list often addit criteria place on the record select or queri will reveal a more
pertin list of inform most data analysi program includ simpl find macro to
help locat specif record
join file
the join function gather togeth the specifi part of differ data file join file
combin field from two sort input file into a third file join is us to match data in a
transact file with record in a master file such as match invoic data in an account
receiv file to a master cluster for exampl you mai need to compar two differ file
to find differ record between file the follow is an exampl of how join two file
can easili provid that inform
file 1
custom account balanc last invoic
jerri cleaner 555221 12500 123010
qualiti garment 555658 9283 111510
beverli tailor 554891 27588 011510
file 2
custom account balanc last invoic
qualiti garment 555658 9283 111510
mccloud fabric 556897 10888 092410
beverli tailor 554891 27588 011510
the join except file
custom account balanc last invoic
mccloud fabric 556897 10888 092409
jerri cleaner 555221 12500 123009
multifil process
multifil process allow the user to relat sever file by defin relationship between
multipl file without the us of the join command a common data relationship would be
to relat an outstand invoic master file to an account receiv file base on the
custom number the relationship can be further extend to includ an invoic detail file
base on invoic number thi relationship will allow you to see which custom have
outstand invoic sort by date
data analysi and report tool investig
3608 2011 fraud examin manual
correl analysi
us thi function investig can determin the relationship between differ variabl
in the raw data investig can learn a lot about comput data file by learn the
relationship between two variabl for exampl we should expect a strong correl
between these independ and depend variabl becaus a direct relationship exist
between the two variabl hotel cost should increas as the number of dai travel
increas the gallon of paint us should increas as the number of hous built increas
you can probabl us mani more of such relationship
independ variabl depend variabl
number of dai travel hotel cost
number of document print ream of paper us
number of hous built paint us
verifi multipl of a number
with thi function an auditor can determin whether regularli disburs check such as
reimburs for mileag ar consist within the regular rate for instanc if the mileag
check do not measur up to the 30centspermil rate a red flag should automat be
rais
complianc verif
thi function determin whether compani polici ar met by employe transact if a
compani limit the amount of it reimburs the softwar can check to see that thi
limit is be observ mani time fraud exam iner can find earli indic of fraud by
test detail data for valu abov or below specifi amount for exampl when
employe ar out of town do thei adher to the compani polici of not spend more
than 30 a dai for meal for starter we can look at the expens report and select those
with meal expens exceed 30 with the in format return from thi simpl queri we
have a start point for suspect fraud even though these varianc ar small 2 and 3
the time taken to research small varianc can be well invest the trail might lead to
someth big after further investig you might learn that the employe did not have
support document to submit becaus a vendor sale repres paid for all the
meal if thi is the case you have two fraud suspect the employe and the employe boss
who approv the report
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3609
duplic search
fraud examin and auditor can perform search on invoic disburs numer to
see if ani invoic have been paid twice by crosscheck the invoic with the vendor
paid duplic bill can be easi to catch
vertic ratio analysi
vertic analysi is a techniqu for analyz the relationship between the item on an
incom statement balanc sheet or statement of cash flow by express compon as
percentag in the vertic analysi of an incom statement net sale is assign 100 percent
on a balanc sheet total asset or total liabil and equiti is assign 100 percent all other
item ar express as a percentag of these two number
by perform thi function you can determin whether paid expenditur over a period ar
reason amount if on area of compani expens seem abnorm larg for a short
amount of time a red flag should immedi be rais
horizont ratio analysi
horizont analysi is a techniqu for analyz the percentag chang in individu financi
statement item from on year to the next the first year in the analysi is consid the
base year and the chang to subsequ year ar comput as a percentag of the base
year
thi function determin the trend of a compani expens inventori and so on
discrep in a compani net profit or a larg shift in amount of inventori would
suggest that someth is not right within the compani
data analysi and report tool investig
3610 2011 fraud examin manual
date function
variou softwar program allow you to check for differ in date such as invoic date
by verifi that check disburs ar consist you can ensur that no suspici
payment were arrang by an employe analysi program will also allow for ag of data
the follow is an exampl of account receiv ag
balanc sheet vertic analysi horizont analysi
year on year two chang c hang
asset
current asset
cash 4500 0 14 1 50 0 0 4 300 0 0 67
acct receiv 1500 0 0 45 2 0 00 0 0 47 5 00 0 0 33
inventori 7500 0 23 1 5 00 0 0 35 7 50 0 0 10 0
fi xed asset net 6000 0 18 6 00 0 0 14 0
total 33 00 0 0 10 0 4 2 50 0 0 100 9 50 0 0 29
acct payabl 9500 0 29 2 1 50 0 0 51 1 2 00 0 0 12 6
longterm debt 6000 0 18 6 00 0 0 14 0
stockhold equiti
common stock 2500 0 8 2 50 0 0 6 0
paidin capit 750 0 0 23 7 50 0 0 18 0
retain earn 7500 0 23 5 00 0 0 12 250 0 0 33
total 33 00 0 0 10 0 4 2 50 0 0 100 9 50 0 0 29
incom statement vertic analysi horizont analysi
year on year two chang chang
net sale 2500 0 0 10 0 4 5 00 0 0 100 2 0 00 0 0 80
cost of good sold 1250 0 0 50 3 0 00 0 0 67 1 7 50 0 0 14 0
gross margin 1250 0 0 50 1 5 00 0 0 33 2 50 0 0 20
oper expens
sell expens 5000 0 20 7 50 0 0 17 2 50 0 0 50
administr expens 6000 0 24 1 0 00 0 0 22 4 00 0 0 67
net incom 1500 0 6 250 0 0 6 400 0 0 26 7
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3611
graph
graph like pictur ar worth a thousand word data analysi program can provid
numer type of graph to give fraud examin a quick glimps of the data for exampl
an inquiri should be made as to why novemb expens ar 10000 more than the
monthli norm
gener and administr expens 2010
in thousand
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
jan feb mar apr mai jun jul aug sep oct nov dec
exampl of data analysi queri
the follow ar typic exampl of data analysi queri that can be perform by data
analysi softwar
gener ledger analysi
select specif journal entri for analysi
creat actual to budget comparison report
analyz and confirm specif ledger account for legitim transact activ
speed account reconcili through special account queri
calcul financi ratio
calcul percentag comparison ratio between account
prepar custom report cash flow profitloss and asset and liabil total report
compar summari by major account in ani order lowhigh highlow
creat report in ani format by account divis depart etc
data analysi and report tool investig
3612 2011 fraud examin manual
account receiv
creat a list of custom limit increas and decreas
ag account receiv in variou format
identifi gap in sequenti form such as invoic
identifi duplic invoic or custom account number
show specifi report on credit taken by custom
report custom summari by invoic product etc
identifi custom activ by ag product etc
compar custom credit limit and current or past balanc
sale analysi
creat a report of all system overrid and sale except
analyz return and allow by store depart or other area
summar trend by custom type product salesperson etc
compar ratio of current sale to outstand receiv or other variabl
gener report on a correl between product demand or suppli and sale price
account payabl
audit paid invoic for manual comparison with actual invoic
summar larg invoic by amount vendor etc
identifi debit to expens account outsid of set default account
reconcil check regist to disburs by vendor invoic
verifi vendor 1099 requir
creat vendor detail and summari analysi report
review recur monthli expens and compar to postedpaid invoic
gener a report on specifi voucher for manual audit or investig
asset manag
gener depreci to cost report
compar book and tax depreci and indic varianc
sort asset valu by asset type or dollar amount
select sampl for asset exist verif
recalcul expens and reserv amount us replac cost
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3613
cash disburs
summar cash disburs by account bank depart vendor etc
verifi audit trail for all disburs by purchas order vendor depart etc
gener vendor cash activ summari for analysi
identifi disburs by depart supervisor approv or amount limit
payrol
summar payrol activ by specif criteria for review
identifi chang to payrol or employe file
compar timecard and payrol rate for possibl discrep
prepar check amount report for amount over a certain limit
check proper supervisori author on payrol disburs
purchas
track schedul receipt date versu actual receipt date in summari and detail
compar vendor perform by summar item deliveri time and amount
isol purchas order type for analysi
analyz late shipment
data analysi checklist
the follow ar some kei issu to address as on conduct a data analysi
ensur data valid and data integr there is alwai a concern when the examin
move data from on venu to anoth on of the concern is data valid is the data
valid and pertin to the investig the second concern is integr is the valid data
that wa select correct a simpl check or au dit of the valid and integr of the data
should be the first step in the data analysi
consid data format and structur thi consider is import when the examin
wish to import or export data with hi comput a date can be format into a
number of differ style such as mmddyyyi the structur of the data will also be
import along with the extens a text file will have a txt extens associ with
it what format is the current data in what format will the comput requir how doe
the examin get the data from here to there if the data format and structur ar
differ
count the zero the examin should perform a preliminari analysi to ensur that the
kei strateg issu he is about to develop is worth the effort befor initi hi fraud
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3614 2011 fraud examin manual
consid the spectrum of distinct level of aggreg at which fraud monitor is
requir determin the lowest level transact level the highest level multiparti
crimin conspiraci and the interven layer that mai be present in your industri
and respect data
begin with the end in mind in hi book the seven habit of highli effect peopl stephen
covei state that begin with the end in mind is good habit when you develop your
fraud intellig action plan be certain to consid the end result on question to ask
mai be will thi algorithmconsult hold up under the intens scrutini of a court of
law
evalu data analysi softwar
in short there ar no silver bullet but ani data analysi softwar should possess the
follow minimum requir
data importexport capabl consid your data format and structur how easili
is data importedexport
data visual how easi is it to move your data from a spreadsheet into a graphic
for analysi and interpret
look for a suit of tool just as there is not on screwdriv for everi job there is not
onli on softwar program for the examin fraud intellig effort therefor he
should choos the most appropri set of tool accord to hi data and then select the
softwar that best fit hi current and futur need
develop a twoprong effort of us the comput to acquir fraud intellig us
commerci softwar current on the market and begin collabor activ with the
academ at your local univers there ar numer softwar packag in variou
stage of develop in academia that ar in need of data to be test thi can prove
to be a winwin for both parti the examin ha the data and the academ have the
prototyp softwar
evalu data mine softwar
becaus no singl softwar tool can satisfi all user purpos examin must consid the
applic with respect to their particular need ken collier an expert in data
wareh busi intellig softwar engin and agil method and hi
colleagu establish a framework for evalu data mining3 the framework divid the
criteria into the follow four area
3 collier k carei b sautter d and marjaniemi c a methodolog for evalu and select data mine
softwar proceed of the 32nd hawaii intern confer on system scienc 1999 ieee
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3615
perform perform refer to the abil to handl a varieti of data sourc
function function refer to the varieti of capabl technic method and
methodolog for data mine includ in the program
usabl usabl refer to the conform of differ level and type of user
without lose us or function
support of ancillari activ ancillari task support permit the user to perform the varieti
of task that support data mine
evalu data mine consult
if howev an entiti intend to us a data mine consult the follow qualiti should
be assess
innov how doe the individu stai current look for profession associ
public and train in your area of investig
creativ can the individu work in a creativ environ such as fraud intellig
can the individu work unsupervis and be expect to produc result sinc fraud is
a move target how ha a past client platfo rm alter from the origin investig
whyhow did that occur what were the result
experi doe the individu have experi in the type of investig you ar
plan doe the individu have experi enc in the type of softwaretool you ar
plan to us doe the individu have experi in the type of data you have
the embodi of thi expertis might take on two three or more peopl you realli
need peopl who understand what it is thei ar look forand what thei can do with it
onc thei find it
type of data mine and analysi softwar
there ar mani type of data mine and data analysi softwar on the market these dai
and everi year new product and new version of old product emerg becaus everi fraud
examin involv data analysi is differ it would be imposs to recommend on
softwar product to serv everi purpos choos a data analysi tool is someth that the
fraud examin must evalu on each individu case a fraud examin should research
applic intens to decid which packag is most appropri for the current
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3616 2011 fraud examin manual
data mine and knowledg discoveri softwar ar gener classifi into the follow
categori
public domainsharewarefreewar thi type of softwar is avail free or for a
nomin charg through websit ftp site and newsgroup mani sharewar program
such as wink sda allow user a trial period after which thei must pai a fee to
reactiv the softwar freewar howev is avail at no cost or for an option fee
these type of program can be locat through internet search engin and through
softwar download servic such as zdnet
beta softwar beta softwar is prereleas softwar that is still in test mode gener
thi type of softwar is free and user ar ask to review the softwar perform
report malfunct and so on
commerci applic commerci applic ar gener releas product that
usual come with technic support and warranti the most promin commerci
applic which ar discuss below includ
acl
idea
excel
activedata for excel
autoaudit
snap report
datawatch corpor monarch for window
arbutu queri
oversight system
acl
acl is a gener audit softwar program it is on of the prefer softwar tool of
audit and financi profession for data extract data analysi fraud detect and
continu monitor acl provid a combinat ion of data access analysi and integr
report it read and compar enterpris dataflat or relat databas spreadsheet
or report file on pc or server allow the sourc data to remain intact acl emploi a
singl consist client interfac and provid easi immedi access to data
command ar alreadi preprogram for data analysi autom your analysi through
continu monitor and realtim notif
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3617
with acl you can
analyz data independ from your it depart with a user interfac pulldown
menu toolbar and pointandclick command
analyz transact data in file of ani size to ensur 100percent coverag and
confid in your result
produc report
identifi trend pinpoint except and highlight potenti area of concern
locat error and potenti fraud by compar and analyz file accord to end
user criteria
identifi control issu and ensur complianc with standard
for more inform visit wwwaclcom
idea
like acl idea interact data extract and analysi is a gener audit softwar
program more specif it is a pcbase file interrog packag that allow
account auditor and financi manag to view sampl and analyz data from ani
other computer system thi softwar provid some function previous onli
avail to electron data process edp auditor and system specialist idea let the
user make inquiri of data file perform random unit sampl and calcul total and
averag the softwar will perform specif criteria search unusu item queri and
identifi gap or duplic in sequenc addition to differenti normal audit pattern
from suspect on examin can us idea to perform data analysi us benford law
addition idea includ a number of tool to prevent and detect fraud includ
person vet tool the power to author transact independ and the abil to
observ employe thi softwar consid purchas payrol and bank the most
common place for the occurr of fraud
gener function
idea gener function ar discuss below
file file manag and file manipul
idea file manag and manipul applic allow the user to importexport file
from almost ani format includ xml and specif account packag us an easi
industrystandard file manag program gener a singl databas from sever other
data analysi and report tool investig
3618 2011 fraud examin manual
databas us a comparedatabas option to identifi differ in a numer field within
two file for a common kei combin field from two databas into a singl databas to test
for data match across file and us the appenddatabas option concaten two or more
file into a singl databas for audit test
data applic
with idea data applic user can exercis extract or except test to identifi
item that satisfi a specif characterist the equat editor allow you to creat simpl or
veri complex extract and the function ar us to perform more complex
calcul and except test the search function can seek text or numer valu
across select field in multipl databas us standard or advanc search techniqu
idea duplic can identifi item within a databas in which up to eight field of
inform ar the same user can also search for gap in numer sequenc or
alphanumer sequenc with a userdefin mask the chart data option allow data file
to be graph or test result exhibit in bar stack bar pie plot or area chart data
action field allow user to set up relationship across multipl file
sampl
idea offer five sampl method with the abil to calcul sampl size base on
paramet enter and evalu the result of sampl test the sampl method
avail ar systemat random stratifi random monetari unit and classic variabl
sampl
analysi
idea analysi applic allow user to appli benford law stratif
summar ag and pivot tabl to raw data
product
with the product applic there ar sever differ function that can displai the
data save the oper carri out on a databas gener statist for all numer and
date field within a databas and creat a script with the help of objectori
program languag
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3619
fraud test
fraud examin and auditor can us idea data analysi applic to identifi potenti
sign of fraud the follow ar a few exampl of the type of fraud scheme that
examin can identifi with idea data analys applic
employe fraud
identifi employe account at financi institut that have excess number of credit
memo
identifi employe account at financi institut that have larg deposit
compar employe home address social secur number telephon number and
bank rout and account number to those of vendor from vendor master file
at financi institut compar employe social secur number against those of
deposit and loan account to identifi those not properli code as employe account
analyz all debit to incom account particularli debit memo
monitor the activ in suspens account includ the ag of suspens item and the
roll of similar amount
analyz claim paid by corpor medic insur provid
obtain a social secur number list from an outsid vendor to test for valid social
secur number and determin whether the holder is aliv or deceas
question invoic
identifi invoic without a valid purchas order
look for invoic from vendor not in the approvedvendor file
find invoic for more than on purchas order author
identifi multipl invoic with the same item descript
extract vendor with duplic invoic number
look for multipl invoic for the same amount on the same date
find invoic payment issu on nonbusi dai saturdai and sundai
identifi multipl invoic at or just under approv cutoff level
phantom vendor scheme
match name address phone number and social secur number between
employe and vendor file
check vendor address against mail drop address list
data analysi and report tool investig
3620 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback or conflict of interest scheme
look for vendor price greater than the standard
identifi price increas greater than accept percentag
check for continu purchas in spite of high rate of return reject or credit
look for high volum purchas from on vendor
dormant account scheme
check that all applic account have been flag as dormant
identifi dormant account with activ
check for transfer from dormant account to employe account
check chang of address on dormant account crosscheck new address with
employe address
monei launder scheme
identifi account with larg averag valu of transact it is common for there to be
a small number of highvalu transact through an account be us for monei
launder
identifi match debit and credit transact on the same account within a short time
period
search for larg round transact valu
identifi multipl account for particular individu
identifi larg cash deposit
test custom identif procedur by search for miss data field such as date
of birth social secur number or driver licens number
cross check custom address against mail drop address list
for more inform about idea visit wwwaudimationcom
excel
excel is a spreadsheet program by microsoft that can be us for store organ and
manipul data mani account auditor and fraud examin us excel for basic data
analysi task for exampl excel allow user to sort subtot filter and merg data thei
can creat calcul field as well as perform statist analysi such as regress
excel howev ha mani limit that limit it us for detect fraud these
limit ar discuss in the next section which examin activedata for excel
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3621
activedata for excel
activedata for microsoft excel is an easytous tool for advanc data manipul and
analysi within the excel environ
activedata for excel wa design to overcom excel mani limit
excel limit activedata for excel compens
doe not document the fraud
examin work in easytoaccess
log for refer and storag
activedata for excel provid a log of each
process step as a comment in cell a1 of the
worksheet creat then us the index sheet
function a summari page of all comment field
can easili be creat for review in essenc
creat an audit log of all work perform with
the spreadsheet data
ha difficulti perform data
analysi and manag test such
as relat tabl although it can be
accomplish it is an oner task
activedata for excel provid more than 100
dataanalysi and manag featur that
autom function some of which mai be
possibl but extrem difficult in excel
doe not have function
specif tailor to the fraud
examin for exampl an examin
can calcul a sampl in just a coupl
of click with minim train us
specif design audit softwar
in excel it can be done but it doe
take much effort and guidanc
activedata for excel ha more than 100 featur
that ar tailor to the auditor account and
fraud examin for exampl you can us
activedata for excel to find duplic record in
a few click rather than set up complex
formula in excel
the follow ar some exampl of how activedata can be us for fraud detect
fraud detect techniqu for account payabl
vendor summari total period on to period two comparison
thi is a basic analyt report to identifi trend in a vendor purchas histori a trend
analysi should be complet to identifi kei vendor with whom activ ha increas or
decreas substanti thi can best be assess us the dollar and percentag varianc
field which can be ad as calcul field in excel base on the chang in the busi
data analysi and report tool investig
3622 2011 fraud examin manual
environ andor new compani project a reason assess should be
perform on the vendor chang
descript statisticsbenford law analysi
descript statist provid maximum amount minimum amount averag amount and
other highlevel statist these statist should be review for reason for
exampl a high number of neg amount or a maximum amount that look too high
might not be reason
after obtain the descript statist of a data set the softwar provid a benford law
analysi of the first two digit of the data as well as a list of all amount from highest to
lowest frequenc for review
to review benford law distinguish between natur and nonnatur number natur
number ar those number that ar not order in a particular number scheme and ar not
gener from a random number system for exampl most account payabl file will be
popul by dollar valu that ar natur number convers nonnatur number like
social secur number and telephon number ar design systemat to convei
inform that restrict the natur natur of the number
benford law provid that the distribut of the initi digit in natur number is not
random instead it follow a predict pattern the tabl below show the expect
occurr for the distribut of the first digit in natur number accord to thi law
first digit probabl
1 301
2 176
3 125
4 97
5 79
6 67
7 58
8 51
9 46
total 1000
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3623
that is benford law maintain that certain di git show up more than other do a 1 will
appear as the first nonzero digit roughli 30 percent of the time 2 will be the lead digit
almost 18 percent of the time 9 will lead o ff onli 46 percent of the time moreov zero
is most like to be the second digit appear 12 percent of the time
benford law make it possibl to detect fraudul number in larg data file by
compar the frequenc of the appear of initi digit in a list of number to those
anticip by benford law for exampl when embezzl invent number thei tend to
fake data contain too mani instanc of initi digit of 7 8 and 9 and too few
instanc of 1 2 and 3 thu with benford law examin can tell if someon
fake data that ar deriv from other data and thei can also identifi error within the data
that appear out of place given the data frequenc of appear
the benford law analysi should be execut first so the most statist outlier can be
review
furthermor as a follow up to these test examin should us a queri sheet to queri
outlier activ for addit review
aboveaverag payment to a vendor more than two time the averag
unusu larg payment to a vendor in relat to the averag ar a sign of error eg a
keypunch error or fraud eg a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid addit
amount that ar kickedback to the employe enter the payment into the system
for vendor with unusu payment abov the averag a sampl of the averag payment
invoic as well as the unusu payment invoic should be review the reason of
the purchas should be assess base on the document review the auditor should
be keenli awar of the potenti for a keypunch error regard the unusu payment
andor the possibl of the vendor purpos overcharg the organ
duplic payment test
duplic payment to vendor normal repres error that the comput system wa
unabl to detect in most system a check will be made as to whether the vendor number
invoic number and amount ar the same thi test could be run to ensur thi basic control
is oper and also to test for other permut of duplic ani result from thi
test should be review first for trend for exampl rent payment that occur on a monthli
data analysi and report tool investig
3624 2011 fraud examin manual
basi mai appear to be duplic payment when in fact thei ar simpli regularli occur
payment note also that certain account packag allow the issuanc of partial payment
eg a payment to the same vendor with the same invoic number and amount therefor
the auditor should determin whether the system allow such payment and if so omit them
prior to run thi applic
void check should also be review if a payment is made first on a regular check and
then on a void on onli on payment wa technic made
employeetovendor address match
thi test identifi ident or similar field between the master tabl of vendor and
employe in an attempt to identifi fraudul payment to employe while thi test
explain how to complet thi task for address the same could be done for phone
number tax identif number and other person inform
onc the result ar produc the auditor should scan them to determin if there ar ani
valid address match between the employe and vendor tabl as a next step a queri
sheet could be creat of the actual invoic post to ani question vendor to determin
if thei ar fraudul two note when complet thi review ar
becaus thi exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or
vendor inform independ of the account payabl depart who mai be
culpabl for creat the fals vendor account
becaus it is common to pai employe travel and entertain expens or employe
advanc thi should be the kei reason to not consid the payment fraudul if
possibl the vendor file should be filter for all employe travel and entertain
vendor account prior to run thi test
identifi payment made after period end for valid liabil at period end
thi report work to identifi unrecord liabil a common scheme is for an
organ to hold an invoic by not enterin g it into the system then after period end
the invoic will be enter into the system therebi evad the expens charg in the period
under review
the invoic identifi in thi test should be review for reason and materi if
not materi further test work mai not be consid necessari if materi trend mai be
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3625
identifi in the type of invoic or the vendor the final analysi should includ pull the
actual invoic to determin whether thei ar for servic render or product receiv
befor the period end
identifi exceed purchas order
thi report work to identifi author issu within an account payabl process
wherebi the invoic paid exce the approv purchas order amount asid from
assess the author limit thi report test the system control that should not allow an
invoic to be paid abov a predetermin limit normal between 5 and 10 percent
the report mai also highlight fraud
in which a valid purchas order is provid to author payment yet inflat payment
ar made to assist the fraudster in some wai
in which vendor work with an employe creat a purchas order with valid unit
price yet inflat those price when the invoic ar sent
thi test mai highlight a control issu within the comput system which should check for
exceed purchas order or it mai identifi numer overrid to the comput system
these overrid mai be within the normal cours of busi eg purchas order price
were meant to be at the invoic price rate but were enter in error on the purchas order
but mai also highlight fraudul activ regardless the auditor should walk through the
process of enter a purchas order and associ invoic to understand the system
control onc understood the differ present in thi test can be investig by
vouch to purchas order and invoic document
fraud detect techniqu for the gener ledger
stratifi gener ledger detail inform
look at the multitud of activ in a gene ral ledger and ask yourself how can i survei
thi data in an extrem quick manner while effici plan my audit thi test should
provid the answer becaus it help the auditor focu on largedollar post while
assess the administr burden of maintain lowdollar activ
the stratif report should be review for
unreason larg balanc for which the activ could be queri for recalcul and
proper classif
a high number of transact with low accumul activ for possibl consolid
plan detail test of the journal entri approv process
data analysi and report tool investig
3626 2011 fraud examin manual
journal entri gap test
gap mai signal incomplet data process or in the situat of journal entri possibl
hidden entri usual a method of document these occurr along with a review by
an independ parti is suffici to ensur the complet and accuraci of process
howev it is rare that a journal entri gap test is perform in the account depart it
is more common in the account payabl area relat to the check sequenc so thi mai be
the first time thi test is be perform
gap in the journal entri sequenc should be review with the account depart the
test work should answer the follow question
what procedur ar in place to document and approv all gap in the sequenc
how ar gap commun to manag
identifi nonstandard journal entri made in a timefram after year
end relat to specif account
nonstandard journal entri ar gener those that ar post manual rather than
through an autom feed from a fix asset or account receiv subledg such entri
ar more prone to error and fraud mainli due to human error the judgment appli to
support the entri and the possibl of an overrid by manag in author the entri
thi is especi true for entri made just after year end relat to the prior year as these
entri ar more prone to be adjust for the fiscal year annual report
given the abov the test for these entri should includ
review the journal entri and associ support document
ensur the approv ar appropri for the size and natur of the journal entri
assess whether gener accept account principl gaap ar be appli
summar activ by user account
thi test look for
standard name such as default or test these name usual have equal simpl
password for a hacker to guess and should gener be avoid replac to these
gener user id would be specif id associ with the person us the system eg
jsmith
unrecogn or termin employe thi test focus on the respons within
the mi function to ensur that onli author employe have system access compar
the list creat by thi test to an activ employe roster to spot ani violat
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3627
user who have access beyond their level of respons thi access mai highlight a
nonsegreg of duti in which a person ha an opportun to commit fraud by be
abl to initi author andor record a transact
the result report should be review bear in mind the abov consider
recommend step includ
delet default password and replac them with specif id
delet employe who ar not on the activ employe roster
review user who ar post high activ or who mai have access to other non
segreg function and assess whether other control ar need to mitig the such
individu access
fraud detect techniqu for revenu
missingunusu custom masterfil informationmatch to prior year
for chang
thi report will identifi chang in the custom masterfil such as addit and delet
given that most system do not track the chang in the custom masterfil eg there is
no last maintain on date field thi report is sometim the onli mean of determin
chang in the custom master
the fraud examin should review major addit andor delet to the custom
masterfil given that there is a high potenti for fraud on newli ad custom eg
post fals sale invoic to phoni custom account to inflat periodend sale balanc
the name and address for such custom should be review against employe with the
abil to enter invoic into the system thi can be done us the account payabl test
describ in thi book that match vendor address to employe address sinc thi
exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or custom file
independ of the account receiv depart which mai be culpabl for creat the
fals custom account
cash receipt to open invoic match
thi test help assess the exist and valuat of open invoic at period end base on
the cash receiv subsequ to year end therefor it is on of the most popular test us
by fraud examin in assess the exist of period end invoic
data analysi and report tool investig
3628 2011 fraud examin manual
base on thi test the fraud examin can easili assess whether open invoic were paid with
cash and therefor exist at year end and for those still outstand whether thei should
be review further from the perspect of yearend valuat such invoic probabl
relat to custom who regularli pai late but thei could repres new custom payment
issu andor fraudul sale post at yearend that will never receiv cash
ag receiv extract older balanc and summar by custom
thi test mainli recalcul the ag of the invoic in the account receiv ledger for
review against the companyderiv report ani differ between thi calcul and the
report us by manag mai be due to a system error a poorli design report or fraud
to orchestr fraud manag mai hide the true payment pattern of custom to
minim their bad debt valuat reserv at year end
the ag report should be reconcil to the organ account receiv ag report
ani differ should be investig on approach is to extract a sampl of invoic
see previou test on review a sampl of invoic within a specif ag group and
reconcil to the ag report on an invoic by invoic basi thi work mai identifi report
error or an attempt by the organ to hide the true ag of account receiv
the focu of test work should be on more current ag categori that mai be
inappropri inflat
onc the invoic ar summar by custom the ag report also highlight custom
balanc older than a predefin old limit thi mai be 180 or 270 dai after which
payment of such invoic is unlik larg custom balanc could be review with
manag as to their collect and possibl with the actual custom thi analysi
would further support the yearend bad debt reserv calcul
calcul the differ between ship and invoic date as well as invoic date with no shipment
untim erron andor fraudul sale invoic mai be detect if invoic ar sent
without valid shipment in thi case revenu is potenti be record prior to be
earn further research of these invoic should be done independ of the sale and
account receiv function in order to ensur an independ analysi
for more inform about activedata for excel visit wwwinformationactivecom
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3629
autoaudit
autoaudit is a comprehens integr audit autom system in addit to the
workpap and report function autoaudit ha entitylevel and processlevel risk
assess staff schedul resourc plan issu track time report expens
report qualiti assur depart metric and an ad hoc report modul all of
these modul ar integr and data automat flow from on modul into the next
autoaudit is design to autom all of the primari process that occur in an audit
depart
although autoaudit autom mani part of ani type of audit of particular interest to
fraud examin ar it risk assess function autoaudit offer an integr risk
assess modul with the option of follow a horizont methodolog busi process
risk assess a vertic methodolog audit univers made up of userdefin audit
entiti or a combin of both methodolog specif risk and process ar identifi
by the client and the risk factor and weight can be custom to fit the specif need of
the depart and industri inform about the inher and residu risk help
determin issu dure the audit and the inform obtain dure fieldwork can be
push back into the risk assess to us as the start point for the next cycl of
plan and audit
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
snap report
snap report is a data mine softwar program design for us with lotu note
microsoft excel spreadsheet and access databas it chief virtu is it eas of us most
softwar requir a familiar with databas and data mine techniqu but anyon with
basic spreadsheet skill can produc report and graphic with thi product in snap data
retriev and analysi ar autom with onebutton function some task ar accomplish
by draganddrop
snap produc gantt chart ie graphic represent of project and count
occurr of kei word rather than onli chart actual number the softwar also
creat stack noncolumnar report and gener multipl relation data set from
on origin recordfunct not avail in other product snap is not as power
as some other data mine softwar but it is easier to us it is adequ to most task
though some complex case mai need a stronger packag
data analysi and report tool investig
3630 2011 fraud examin manual
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
datawatch corpor monarch for window
monarch is reportmin softwar monarch is uniqu becaus it extract data from exist
report creat by other program and then convert the data into action data eg text
file spreadsheet or databas tabl for exampl electron data that is retriev from an
account system or download from an onlin sourc can be broken down into
individu record by monarch model monarch can read report file produc on ani
mainfram midrang clientserv or pc system these file ar commonli known as print
file spool file txt file format ascii file prn file and sdf file monarch can
also read dbf file and delimit ascii file
onc the data is action it can be analyz that is the record can be manipul by
data analysi applic like access and excel
monarch special in read complex report in ascii plain text format it data mine
capabl ar us for data integr test monarch can be us by itself or in tandem
with other audit softwar such as acl but it will provid the most benefit when us in
conjunct with anoth data analysi tool
monarch serv three main function for investig
perform autom audit test and test of variou program control
verifi data on manag or exter nal parti reportgener accuraci
proactiv identifi error and fraudul activ
moreov examin can us monarch to perform sever function in a financi analysi or
risk assess
summari window to summar inform by a differ criteria than the report did
sort data within the tabl window to gener an alphabet sort list or to identifi
the largest or smallest transact
time seri analysi to compil inform from 12 separ report into a monthbi
month summari allow the investig to identifi trend
graph data within the summari window to graph ani inform in the summari
window into a pie area line or bar chart quickli to visual composit trend or
distribut thi chart function is much more straightforward than in spreadsheet
program such as ms excel and lotu 123
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3631
creat calcul field to perform custom calcul on ex ist data field or new field
not present in the origin file
here ar a few practic exampl of monarch investig capabl the softwar
allow investig to
view the 20 largest vendor by invoic am ount to compar the amount with their
expect of those amount
summar by purchas order number to determin if the sum of all transact relat
to a purchas order exce the amount author by the purchas order
measur transact volum and amount process by each input clerk to identifi
unusu activ
compar budget versu actual figur by comput a differ field
chart custom delinqu trend for the past 12 month
for more inform about monarch visit wwwdatawatchcom
arbutu queri
arbutu queri is a comprehens queri tool with builtin dataanalysi capabl with
arbutu queri user ar abl to queri a wide rang of data sourc without have to know
the locat or structur of the underli data arbutu queri emploi arbutu analyz to
provid direct readonli queri of data arbutu analyz us a familiar spreadsheet
interfac to brows analyz or report on the data the softwar can handl unlimit file
size and ha power data analysi and manipul command that support even the most
advanc task
for more inform on the arbutu program visit wwwarbutussoftwarecom
oversight system
oversight system offer softwar that help busi check for fraud error and other
problem it softwar provid continu monitor and continu audit with
investig resolut and track capabl for continu protect against fraud
misus and error in busi transact oversight product also identifi error and
control violat as thei happen so compani can address these issu when thei ar less
complex and less costli to correct oversight product includ featur that integr
investig reconcili and document of data for more inform visit
wwwoversightsystemscom
data analysi and report tool investig
3632 2011 fraud examin manual
report and case manag softwar
there ar a number of program that can assist the fraud examin in manag the data and
inform gather these program can also be us to creat report graph and chart
of a particular case some of the most us of these program for fraud investig ar
discuss below
i2 analysi product line
i2 offer a line of analyt tool that allow user to search store visual and analyz data
some of those tool ar discuss below
analyst notebook
i2 inc offer a profession visual and analysi tool call analyst notebook
analyst notebook is a visual investig anali is softwar program that bring clariti to
complex investig and intellig analysi it enabl investig and analyst to turn
larg volum of dispar data into action intellig it creat chart and graph to
allow user to
visual larg volum of investig data to understand the big pictur
reveal pattern and hidden connect to help focu the investig
creat analyt chart manual or automat gener link and timelin chart from
structur data
commun complex case with intuit brief chart that captur and organ
support data
ibas
ibas is i2 investig databas that is it allow user to configur a data store captur
data and perform data analysi in a control environ
data miner
data miner is a data mine applic that can onli be instal with analyst
workstat it allow user to analyz larg amount of data and find ani pattern that mai
exist
analyst workstat
analyst workstat is an integr collect of analyt tool includ analyst
notebook ibas and data miner
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3633
for more inform on i2 product line visit wwwi2inccom
casemap by casesoft
casemap is a case analysi tool that make it easi to organ evalu and explor the fact
charact and issu in a case it is design for us on all type of case and by all type of
litig and investig casemap softwar integr with numer other litigationsupport
and electronicdiscoveri tool includ adob acrobat appli discoveri
binder concord jf litig notebook kpmg discoveri radar livenot and
sanction
spreadsheet
when a casemap file is creat the program auto matic set up a seri of spreadsheet
us to organ critic case knowledg these spreadsheet can be us to organ
inform about the fact document charact issu and case law in everi case
data analysi and report tool investig
3634 2011 fraud examin manual
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3635
fact spreadsheet
the fact spreadsheet includ a case chronolog in which the investig can enter fact
date time and the sourc of each piec of inform investig can also distinguish
between disput and undisput fact and keep track of the statu of each item
object spreadsheet
the object spreadsheet allow investig to organ the cast of charactersa list of the
individu and organ involv in the case and it should also catalog kei document
and other import piec of physic evid
data analysi and report tool investig
3636 2011 fraud examin manual
issu spreadsheet
the issu spreadsheet provid an outlin of the issu includ both legal claim and
critic factual disput the outlin can be ani number of level deep
question spreadsheet
becaus mani question occur dure the earli stage of an investig the question
spreadsheet allow user to filter and sort their open item us variou criteria
research spreadsheet
casemap ha three research spreadsheet author extract from author and a
combin of author and extract the research spreadsheet will organ and
explor the user knowledg about the preced and statut relev to their case and it
includ link to actual case law us the author and extract the author spreadsheet
can be us to manag toplevel inform about preced statut and other type of
case research the extract spreadsheet can be us to captur detail about particular
section of interest excerpt from import case law and statut
link
casemap also provid the abil to link piec of data in on spreadsheet with the sourc
data or other relev data in anoth sheet
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3637
filter
onc inform is organ casemap user can explor it the most power caseexplor
tool in casemap is the filter function a filter oper limit the row that
appear in a spreadsheet and on your print report to those that meet criteria you specifi
for more inform visit wwwcasesoftcom
data analysi and report tool investig
3638 2011 fraud examin manual
actim enterpris risk case manag
actim enterpris risk case manag is case manag softwar that empow
compani to address enterprisewid risk and complianc manag it is design to
help compani detect and react to fraud attack more effici by consolid all fraud
and complianc issu into a central locat accord to actim the risk case manag
support risk oper with workflow manag evid collect and
document and as a result it allow user to
improv risk and complianc oper
detect more issu reduc risk loss and fine
enabl effici and collabor investig
reduc it and oper cost
xanali suit
xanali offer a suit of case manag softwar applic to help user collect
manag analyz and share investig intellig it offer three product powercas
link explor and index
powercas
powercas provid an endtoend platform for conduct largescal investig it
manag all aspect of an investig team activ through the entir investig
process by provid the follow function
provid central data storag
establish a document workflow to ensur that all evid is examin a review
check new case inform against exist data for common and associ
assign and track line of investig
provid a rang of search featur
allow user to visual case data
gener a complet audit trail of all user activ within the system
link explor
link explor allow user to construct databas queri in natur everydai languag and
displai the result in graphic form simpli ask a question by drag and drop icon
onto a queri screen xanali link explor then gener easytoread interact chart
that map how peopl event telephon call email messag and other case detail ar
link as new inform arriv the displai ar instantli updat inform can be
view in a varieti of wai in addit to power link analysi chart link explor can
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3639
displai result in numer other format includ a report a timelin with event
organ in a chronolog order or a hierarchi chart show relationship among peopl
link explor offer sever method to import enter merg or modifi data as well as to
creat new object and link these includ a text import flexibl data import data entri
form quickchart toolbox and object card
index
index is a text extract program that clearli and automat reveal critic connect
between inform store in a databas index automat extract relev
inform from unstructur text us entiti such as a person compani or an event
attribut such as occup sex or compani titl and relationship such as locat at
work for and involv in event xanali provid variou wai to ensur that the
inform repres in the index plan is us these includ load them into a
databas for analysi by link explor or other report or analysi tool in addit to
embed the technolog into thirdparti applic with the kei entiti and
relationship contain in a structur environ it is now possibl to access and queri
thi inform onc a number of document have been process a list of all the peopl
mention in the document or a list of compani vehicl or phone number associ
with those list peopl could be obtain as new document arriv these can be
incorpor and augment the exist result the full power of index capabl can be
embed into a compani own product and technolog on the window platform it
data analysi and report tool investig
3640 2011 fraud examin manual
includ a com interfac to direct the inform extract output into ani requir form
such as input to some other process or to a databas
for more inform on link explor or index visit wwwxanalyscom
enterpris investig manag
norkom technologiess enterpris investig manag softwar is case manag
softwar for antimonei launder and fraud investig it link inform from
multipl insid sourc like foreign travel report databas and debrief employe
secur background inform network log and cyber activ log to compos a pictur
of potenti insid secur threat thi composit approach put otherwis disconnect
piec of inform in context to help prevent sensit inform and capabl from
be compromis for more inform on enterpris investig manag visit
wwwnorkomcom
multichannel fraud
norkom technolog multichannel fraud manag solut provid an endtoend
fraud solut from advanc detect to investig respons and recoveri and is
built on norkom uniqu configur financi crime and complianc platform which
enabl user to custom the technolog as their need chang and new fraud techniqu
emerg norkom sophist detect analyt ar optim to detect a wide rang of
fraud includ plastic fraud applic fraud check fraud deposit fraud sleeper fraud
electron bank fraud phish intern fraud insur fraud account takeov and
ident theft the solut provid fraud detect by unit the analyt power of
special techniqu includ predefin fraud detect scenario indepth behavior
and peer group profil unusu analyt predict model and network analyt
for more inform on multichannel fraud visit wwwnorkomcom
isight case manag softwar
isight case manag softwar is a type of case manag softwar for investig
complaint correct and prevent action manag and other busi process that
requir case manag it allow user to record investig note creat and assign
task with due date and remind send email from within a case record us templat
letter record investig find record investig resolut creat followup task
track time and cost effectu correct action keep an audit trail and attach document
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3641
ethicspoint issu and event manag
ethicspoint provid hotlin and antifraud report and case manag servic it
issu and event manag help busi ma nage report issu eg hr manag
issu workrel injuri secur investig conflict of interest competitor
misconduct ani code of conduct violat etc ethicspoint offer web report form to
help streamlin issu document provid manag with a report mechan
that automat integr an entiti re port data within a central databas
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3701
