2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Data Mining


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Data Mining 
Data mining has roots in statistics, machine learning, data management and databases, 
pattern recognition, and artificial intelligence. All of these are concerned with certain aspects 
of data analysis, so they have much in common;  yet they each have a distinct and individual 
flavor, emphasizing particular problems and types of solutions. 
 
Data mining has great potential to help organizations shift their energy and focus to the 
most important information in their databases. Data mining tools comb databases for 
obscured patterns, finding predictive information that even experts may not recognize. 
Using data mining technologies, companies can evaluate a plethora of information, spotting 
patterns in their marketing and business procedures.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.602   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Although data mining technologies provide key advantages to marketing and business 
activities, they can also manipulate financial data that was previously hidden within a 
company’s database, enabling fraud examiners to detect potential fraud.  
 
Previously, the data-mining process required a computer programmer to oversee the 
process; however, this is no longer necessary. The current method uses a computer and 
computer software to assist in the data-mining process. Data mining software provides an 
easy to use computerized process that gives the fraud examiner the ability to get to data at a 
required level of detail.  
 
Data mining combines several different techniques essential to detecting fraud, including the 
streamlining of raw data into understandable patterns.  
 
Data mining can also help prevent fraud before it happens. For example, SPSS Business 
Intelligence, a consulting group for businesses in electronic commerce, reports that some of 
their customers use data mining tools and applications to develop anti-fraud models that 
score transactions in real-time. The scoring is customized for each business, involving 
factors such as locale of the order, frequency of the order, payment history, and other 
factors. Once a transaction is assigned a high-risk score, the merchant can decide whether to 
accept the transaction, deny it, or investigate further.  
 
Data mining is an effective way for fraud examiners to develop fraud targets for further 
investigation. It can mine databases for various fraud indicators, such as: (1) specific types of 
transactions; (2) patterns within the data; or (3) a relationship between two data fields that 
should not have a relationship (e.g., the same address or telephone number for companies 
with different names). Targets are then examined to develop an investigative strategy 
involving site visits and face-to-face interviews. Data mining can also be refined based on 
interviews of targets.  
 
One of the most sophisticated uses of data mining is known as computer matching. Also called 
data matching  (in Australia and Canada), this approach involves the comparison of two 
discreet data sets to identify questionable overlaps.  
 
But before applying data mining processes, it is important to identify the sources from which 
the data will be collected. Data may be stored in any of the following locations: 
• Mainframe software 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.603 
• Laptop installed software 
• Security system software 
• Hand held devices issued by the company’s employees (e.g., smart phones, thumb drives, 
inventory scanning equipment, etc.) 
• Company vehicle GPS systems 
• Telephone systems  
• Time card systems 
• Key card access 
 
Often, companies use data warehouses to manage data for analysis. Data warehouses  are 
repositories of a company’s electronic data designed to facilitate reporting and analysis. By 
storing data in a data warehouse, data users can query and analyze relevant data stored in a 
single location. Thus, a company with a data warehouse can perform various types of 
analytic operations (e.g., identifying red flags, transaction trends, patterns, or anomalies) to 
assist management with its decision-making responsibilities. 
 
Although this section focuses on electronic data, examiners should also identify manually 
generated data, such as: 
• Visitor check-in logs 
• Appointment logs or individual calendars 
• Customer receipts for cash payments 
• Return merchandise slips 
• Any manually maintained lists 
 
After the examiner has identified the data sources, he should identify how the information is 
stored. This means reviewing the database schema and technical documentation, which 
should allow the investigator to determine how information is stored. One must be ready to 
face a number of pitfalls when attempting to identify how information is stored, from weak 
or nonexistent documentation to limited collaboration from the IT department.  
 
Moreover, once collected, it is critical to ensure that the data is complete and appropriate for 
the analysis to be performed. Depending on how the data was collected and processed, it 
could require some scrubbing to make it usable for analysis purposes; it may be necessary to 
modify certain field formats (e.g., date, time, currency, etc.) to make the information usable. 
 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


data mine
data mine ha root in statist machin learn data manag and databas
pattern recognit and artifici intellig all of these ar concern with certain aspect
of data analysi so thei have much in common yet thei each have a distinct and individu
flavor emphas particular problem and type of solut
data mine ha great potenti to help organ shift their energi and focu to the
most import inform in their databas data mine tool comb databas for
obscur pattern find predict inform that even expert mai not recogn
us data mine technolog compani can evalu a plethora of inform spot
pattern in their market and busi procedur
data analysi and report tool investig
3602 2011 fraud examin manual
although data mine technolog provid kei advantag to market and busi
activ thei can also manipul financi data that wa previous hidden within a
compani databas enabl fraud examin to detect potenti fraud
previous the datamin process requir a comput programm to overse the
process howev thi is no longer necessari the current method us a comput and
comput softwar to assist in the datamin process data mine softwar provid an
easi to us computer process that give the fraud examin the abil to get to data at a
requir level of detail
data mine combin sever differ techniqu essenti to detect fraud includ the
streamlin of raw data into understand pattern
data mine can also help prevent fraud befor it happen for exampl spss busi
intellig a consult group for busi in electron commerc report that some of
their custom us data mine tool and applic to develop antifraud model that
score transact in realtim the score is custom for each busi involv
factor such as local of the order frequenc of the order payment histori and other
factor onc a transact is assign a highrisk score the merchant can decid whether to
accept the transact deni it or investig further
data mine is an effect wai for fraud examin to develop fraud target for further
investig it can mine databas for variou fraud indic such as 1 specif type of
transact 2 pattern within the data or 3 a relationship between two data field that
should not have a relationship eg the same address or telephon number for compani
with differ name target ar then examin to develop an investig strategi
involv site visit and facetofac interview data mine can also be refin base on
interview of target
on of the most sophist us of data mine is known as comput match also call
data match in australia and canada thi approach involv the comparison of two
discreet data set to identifi question overlap
but befor appli data mine process it is import to identifi the sourc from which
the data will be collect data mai be store in ani of the follow locat
mainfram softwar
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3603
laptop instal softwar
secur system softwar
hand held devic issu by the compani employe eg smart phone thumb drive
inventori scan equip etc
compani vehicl gp system
telephon system
time card system
kei card access
often compani us data warehous to manag data for analysi data warehous ar
repositori of a compani electron data design to facilit report and analysi by
store data in a data warehous data user can queri and analyz relev data store in a
singl locat thu a compani with a data warehous can perform variou type of
analyt oper eg identifi red flag transact trend pattern or anomali to
assist manag with it decisionmak respons
although thi section focus on electron data examin should also identifi manual
gener data such as
visitor checkin log
appoint log or individu calendar
custom receipt for cash payment
return merchandis slip
ani manual maintain list
after the examin ha identifi the data sourc he should identifi how the inform is
store thi mean review the databas schema and technic document which
should allow the investig to determin how inform is store on must be readi to
face a number of pitfal when attempt to identifi how inform is store from weak
or nonexist document to limit collabor from the it depart
moreov onc collect it is critic to ensur that the data is complet and appropri for
the analysi to be perform depend on how the data wa collect and process it
could requir some scrub to make it usabl for analysi purpos it mai be necessari to
modifi certain field format eg date time currenc etc to make the inform usabl
data analysi and report tool investig
3604 2011 fraud examin manual
