2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Using Data Analysis Software/Evaluating Data Analysis Software


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Evaluating Data Analysis Software 
In short, there are no silver bullets. But any data analysis software should possess the 
following minimum requirements: 
• Data import/export capabilities. Considering your data format and structure, how easily 
is data imported/exported? 
• Data visualization. How easy is it to move your data from a spreadsheet into a graphic 
for analysis and interpretation? 
• Look for a suite of tools. Just as there is not one screwdriver for every job, there is not 
only one software program for the examiner’s  fraud intelligence efforts. Therefore, he 
should choose the most appropriate set of tools according to his data and then select the 
software that best fits his current and future needs.  
• Develop a two-pronged effort of using the computer to acquire fraud intelligence. Use 
commercial software currently on the market and begin collaborative activities with the 
academics at your local university. There are numerous software packages in various 
stages of development in academia that are in need of data to be tested. This can prove 
to be a win-win for both parties. The examiner has the data and the academics have the 
prototype software. 
 



:


evalu data analysi softwar
in short there ar no silver bullet but ani data analysi softwar should possess the
follow minimum requir
data importexport capabl consid your data format and structur how easili
is data importedexport
data visual how easi is it to move your data from a spreadsheet into a graphic
for analysi and interpret
look for a suit of tool just as there is not on screwdriv for everi job there is not
onli on softwar program for the examin fraud intellig effort therefor he
should choos the most appropri set of tool accord to hi data and then select the
softwar that best fit hi current and futur need
develop a twoprong effort of us the comput to acquir fraud intellig us
commerci softwar current on the market and begin collabor activ with the
academ at your local univers there ar numer softwar packag in variou
stage of develop in academia that ar in need of data to be test thi can prove
to be a winwin for both parti the examin ha the data and the academ have the
prototyp softwar
