2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Using Data Analysis Software/Evaluating Data Mining Consultants


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Evaluating Data Mining Consultants 
If, however, an entity intends to use a data mining consultant, the following qualities should 
be assessed: 
• Innovation : How does the individual stay current? Look for professional associations, 
publications, and training in your area of investigation.  
• Creativity : Can the individual work in a creative environment, such as fraud intelligence? 
Can the individual work unsupervised and be expected to produce results? Since fraud is 
a moving target, how has a past client’s platfo rm altered from the original investigation? 
Why/how did that occur? What were the results?  
• Experience : Does the individual have experience in the type of investigation you are 
planning? Does the individual have experi ence in the type of software/tools you are 
planning to use? Does the individual have experience in the type of data you have? 
 
The embodiment of this expertise might take one, two, three, or more people. You really 
need people who understand what it is they are looking for—and what they can do with it 
once they find it. 
 
 



:


evalu data mine consult
if howev an entiti intend to us a data mine consult the follow qualiti should
be assess
innov how doe the individu stai current look for profession associ
public and train in your area of investig
creativ can the individu work in a creativ environ such as fraud intellig
can the individu work unsupervis and be expect to produc result sinc fraud is
a move target how ha a past client platfo rm alter from the origin investig
whyhow did that occur what were the result
experi doe the individu have experi in the type of investig you ar
plan doe the individu have experi enc in the type of softwaretool you ar
plan to us doe the individu have experi in the type of data you have
the embodi of thi expertis might take on two three or more peopl you realli
need peopl who understand what it is thei ar look forand what thei can do with it
onc thei find it
