2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software 
There are many types of data mining and data analysis software on the market these days, 
and every year new products and new versions of old products emerge. Because every fraud 
examination involving data analysis is different, it would be impossible to recommend one 
software product to serve every purpose. Choosing a data analysis tool is something that the 
fraud examiner must evaluate on each individual case. A fraud examiner should research 
applications intensively to decide which package is most appropriate for the current 
investigation.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data mining and knowledge discovery software are generally classified into the following 
categories: 
• Public domain/shareware/freeware: This type of software is available free or for a 
nominal charge through websites, ftp sites, and newsgroups. Many shareware programs, 
such as WINKS SDA, allow users a trial period, after which they must pay a fee to 
reactivate the software. Freeware, however, is available at no cost or for an optional fee. 
These types of programs can be located through Internet search engines and through 
software download services such as ZDNet. 
• Beta software: Beta software is pre-release software that is still in test mode. Generally, 
this type of software is free, and users are asked to review the software’s performance, 
report malfunctions, and so on.  
• Commercial applications: Commercial applications are general release products that 
usually come with technical support and warranty. The most prominent commercial 
applications, which are discussed below, include: 
–  ACL 
–  IDEA 
–  Excel 
–  ActiveData for Excel 
–  AutoAudit 
–  SNAP! Reporter 
–  DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
–  Arbutus Query 
–  Oversight Systems 
 
ACL 
ACL is a generalized audit software program; it  is one of the preferred software tools of 
audit and financial professionals for data extraction, data analysis, fraud detection, and 
continuous monitoring. ACL provides a combinat ion of data access, analysis, and integrated 
reporting. It reads and compares enterprise data—flat or relational databases, spreadsheets, 
or report files on PCs or servers — allowing the source data to remain intact. ACL employs a 
single, consistent client interface and provides easy, immediate access to data.  
 
Commands are already pre-programmed for data analysis. Automate your analysis through 
continuous monitoring and real-time notification. 
 
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.617 
With ACL you can: 
• Analyze data independently from your IT department, with a user interface, pull-down 
menus, toolbars, and point-and-click commands 
• Analyze transactional data in files of any size to ensure 100-percent coverage and 
confidence in your results 
• Produce reports 
• Identify trends, pinpoint exceptions, and highlight potential areas of concern 
• Locate errors and potential fraud by comparing and analyzing files according to end- 
user criteria 
• Identify control issues and ensure compliance with standards 
 
For more information, visit www.acl.com.  
 
IDEA  
Like ACL, IDEA (Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis) is a generalized audit software 
program. More specifically, it is a PC-based file interrogation package that allows 
accountants, auditors, and financial managers to view, sample, and analyze data from any 
other computerized system. This software provides some functionality previously only 
available to electronic data processing (EDP) auditors and systems specialists. IDEA lets the 
user make inquiries of data files, perform random unit sampling, and calculate totals and 
averages. The software will perform specific criteria searches, unusual item queries, and 
identify gaps or duplicates in sequences. Additionally, to differentiate normal audit patterns 
from suspect ones, examiners can use IDEA to perform data analysis using Benford’s Law.  
 
Additionally, IDEA includes a number of tools to prevent and detect fraud, including 
personal vetting tools, the power to authorize transactions independently, and the ability to 
observe employees. This software considers purchasing, payroll, and banking the most 
common places for the occurrence of fraud. 
 
General Functions 
IDEA’s general functions are discussed below.  
 
FILES, FILE MANAGEMENT, AND FILE MANIPULATION 
IDEA’s file management and manipulation applications allow the user to import/export files 
from almost any format, including XML and specific accounting packages; use an easy, 
industry-standard file management program; generate a single database from several other 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
databases; use a compare-database option to identify differences in a numeric field within 
two files for a common key; combine fields from two databases into a single database to test 
for data matches across files; and use the append-databases option, concatenate two or more 
files into a single database for audit testing.  
 
DATA APPLICATIONS 
With IDEA’s data applications, users can exercise extraction or exception testing to identify 
items that satisfy a specific characteristic, The Equation Editor allows you to create simple or 
very complex extractions, and the @Functions are used to perform more complex 
calculations and exception testing. The Search function can seek text or numeric values 
across selected fields in multiple databases using standard or advanced search techniques. 
IDEA Duplicates can identify items within a database in which up to eight fields of 
information are the same. Users can also search for gaps in numeric sequence or 
alphanumeric sequences with a user-defined mask. The Chart Data option allows data files 
to be graphed or test results exhibited in bar, stacking bar, pie, plot, or area charts. Data 
Action Fields allow users to set up relationships across multiple files. 
 
SAMPLING 
IDEA offers five sampling methods with the ability to calculate sample sizes based on 
parameters entered and evaluate the results of sampling tests. The sampling methods 
available are systematic, random, stratified random, monetary unit, and classical variables 
sampling.  
 
ANALYSIS 
IDEA’s analysis applications allow users to apply Benford’s Law, stratification, 
summarization, aging, and pivot tables to raw data.  
 
PRODUCTIVITY 
With the productivity application, there are several different functions that can display the 
data, save the operations carried out on a database, generate statistics for all numeric and 
date fields within a database, and create a script with the help of object-oriented 
programming language. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.619 
Fraud Tests 
Fraud examiners and auditors can use IDEA’s data  analysis applications to identify potential 
signs of fraud. The following are a few examples of the types of fraud schemes that 
examiners can identify with IDEA’s data analyses applications.   
 
EMPLOYEE FRAUD 
• Identify employee accounts at financial institutions that have excess numbers of credit 
memos.  
• Identify employee accounts at financial institutions that have large deposits. 
• Compare employee home addresses, Social Security numbers, telephone numbers, and 
bank routing and account numbers to those of vendors from vendor master file. 
• At financial institutions, compare employee Social Security numbers against those of 
deposit and loan accounts to identify those not properly coded as employee accounts. 
• Analyze all debits to income accounts, particularly debit memos. 
• Monitor the activity in suspense accounts, including the age of suspense items and the 
rolling of similar amounts. 
• Analyze claims paid by corporate medical insurance providers. 
• Obtain a Social Security number listing from an outside vendor to test for valid Social 
Security numbers and determine whether the holder is alive or deceased. 
 
QUESTIONABLE INVOICES 
• Identify invoices without a valid purchase order. 
• Look for invoices from vendors not in the approved-vendor file. 
• Find invoices for more than one purchase order authorization. 
• Identify multiple invoices with the same item description. 
• Extract vendors with duplicate invoice numbers. 
• Look for multiple invoices for the same amount on the same date. 
• Find invoice payments issued on non-business days (Saturday and Sundays). 
• Identify multiple invoices at or just under approval cut-off levels. 
 
PHANTOM VENDOR SCHEMES 
• Match names, addresses, phone numbers,  and Social Security numbers between 
employee and vendor files. 
• Check vendor addresses against mail drop address lists. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.620   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KICKBACK OR CONFLICT OF INTEREST SCHEMES 
• Look for vendor prices greater than the standard. 
• Identify price increases greater than acceptable percentages. 
• Check for continued purchases in spite of high rates of returns, rejects, or credits. 
• Look for high volume purchases from one vendor. 
 
DORMANT ACCOUNT SCHEMES 
• Check that all applicable accounts have been flagged as dormant. 
• Identify dormant accounts with activity. 
• Check for transfers from dormant accounts to employee accounts. 
• Check changes of addresses on dormant accounts. Cross-check new addresses with 
employee addresses. 
 
MONEY LAUNDERING SCHEMES 
• Identify accounts with large average values of transactions. It is common for there to be 
a small number of high-value transactions through an account being used for money 
laundering. 
• Identify matched debit and credit transactions on the same account within a short time 
period.  
• Search for large, rounded transaction values. 
• Identify multiple accounts for particular individuals. 
• Identify large cash deposits. 
• Test customer identification procedures by searching for missing data fields, such as date 
of birth, Social Security number, or driver’s license number. 
• Cross check customer addresses against mail drop address lists. 
 
For more information about IDEA, visit www.audimation.com. 
 
Excel 
Excel is a spreadsheet program by Microsoft that can be used for storing, organizing and 
manipulating data. Many accountants, auditors, and fraud examiners use Excel for basic data 
analysis tasks. For example, Excel allows users to sort, subtotal, filter, and merge data. They 
can create calculated fields, as well as perform statistical analysis such as regression.  
 
Excel, however, has many limitations that limit its usefulness for detecting fraud. These 
limitations are discussed in the next section, which examines ActiveData for Excel. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.621 
ActiveData for Excel 
ActiveData for Microsoft Excel is an easy-to-use tool for advanced data manipulation and 
analysis within the Excel environment. 
 
ActiveData for Excel was designed to overcome Excel’s many limitations: 
 
Excel Limitation ActiveData for Excel’s Compensation  
Does not document the fraud 
examiner’s work in easy-to-access 
logs for reference and storage. 
ActiveData for Excel provides a log of each 
processed step (as a comment in cell A1 of the 
worksheet created). Then, using the Index Sheets 
function, a summary page of all comment fields 
can easily be created for review, in essence 
creating an audit log of all work performed with 
the spreadsheet data. 
Has difficulty performing data-
 analysis and management tests such 
as relating tables. Although it can be 
accomplished, it is an onerous task. 
ActiveData for Excel provides more than 100 
data-analysis and management features that 
automate functions, some of which may be 
possible but extremely difficult in Excel. 
Does not have functionality 
specifically tailored to the fraud 
examiner. For example, an examiner 
can calculate a sample in just a couple 
of clicks with minimal training using 
specifically designed audit software. 
In Excel, it can be done, but it does 
take much effort and guidance. 
ActiveData for Excel has more than 100 features 
that are tailored to the auditor, accountant, and 
fraud examiner. For example, you can use 
ActiveData for Excel to find duplicate records in 
a few clicks (rather than setting up complex 
formulas in Excel). 
 
The following are some examples of how ActiveData can be used for fraud detection. 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for Accounts Payable 
VENDOR SUMMARY TOTALS PERIOD ONE TO PERIOD TWO COMPARISON 
This is a basic analytical report to identify trends in a vendor’s purchase history. A trend 
analysis should be completed to identify key vendors with whom activity has increased or 
decreased substantially. This can best be assessed using the dollar and percentage variance 
fields, which can be added as calculated fields in Excel. Based on the changes in the business 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.622   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
environment and/or new company projects, a reasonableness assessment should be 
performed on the vendor changes. 
 
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS/BENFORD’S LAW ANALYSIS 
Descriptive statistics provide maximum amount, minimum amount, average amount, and 
other high-level statistics. These statistics should be reviewed for reasonableness; for 
example, a high number of negative amounts or a maximum amount that looks too high 
might not be reasonable. 
 
After obtaining the descriptive statistics of a data set, the software provides a Benford’s Law 
analysis of the first two digits of the data, as well as a list of all amounts from highest to 
lowest frequency, for review.  
 
To review, Benford’s Law distinguishes between natural and non-natural numbers. Natural 
numbers  are those numbers that are not ordered in a particular numbering scheme and are not 
generated from a random number system. For example, most accounts payable files will be 
populated by dollar values that are natural numbers. Conversely, non-natural numbers  like 
Social Security numbers and telephone numbers are designed systematically to convey 
information that restricts the natural nature of the number. 
 
Benford’s Law provides that the distribution of the initial digits in natural numbers is not 
random; instead, it follows a predictable pattern. The table below shows the expected 
occurrence for the distribution of the first digit in natural numbers, according to this law: 
 
First Digit Probability
 1 30.1%
 2 17.6%
 3 12.5%
 4 9.7%
 5 7.9%
 6 6.7%
 7 5.8%
 8 5.1%
 9 4.6%
 Total 100.0%
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.623 
That is, Benford’s Law maintains that certain di gits show up more than others do. A “1” will 
appear as the first non-zero digit roughly 30 percent of the time; “2” will be the leading digit 
almost 18 percent of the time; “9” will lead o ff only 4.6 percent of the time. Moreover, zero 
is most likely to be the second digit, appearing 12 percent of the time.  
 
Benford’s Law makes it possible to detect fraudulent numbers in large data files by 
comparing the frequency of the appearance of initial digits in a list of numbers to those 
anticipated by Benford’s Law. For example, when embezzlers invent numbers, they tend to 
fake data containing too many instances of initial digits of “7,” “8,” and “9” and too few 
instances of “1,” “2,” and “3.” Thus, with Benford’s Law, examiners can tell if someone 
fakes data that are derived from other data, and they can also identify errors within the data 
that appear “out of place” given the data’s frequency of appearance. 
 
The Benford’s Law analysis should be executed first so the most statistical outliers can be 
reviewed.  
 
Furthermore, as a follow up to these tests, examiners should use a Query Sheet to query 
outlier activity for additional review. 
 
ABOVE-AVERAGE PAYMENTS TO A VENDOR (MORE THAN TWO TIMES THE AVERAGE) 
Unusually large payments to a vendor in relation to the average are a sign of error (e.g., a 
key-punch error) or fraud (e.g., a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid additional 
amounts that are kicked-back to the employee entering the payment into the system). 
 
For vendors with unusual payments above the average, a sample of the “average” payment 
invoices, as well as the unusual payment invoices should be reviewed. The reasonableness of 
the purchase should be assessed based on the documentation reviewed. The auditor should 
be keenly aware of the potential for a key-punch error regarding the unusual payment 
and/or the possibility of the vendor purposely overcharging the organization. 
 
DUPLICATE PAYMENT TESTING  
Duplicate payments to vendors normally represent errors that the computer system was 
unable to detect. In most systems, a check will be made as to whether the vendor number, 
invoice number, and amount are the same. This test could be run to ensure this basic control 
is operational and also to test for other permutations of duplication. Any results from this 
test should be reviewed first for trends. For example, rent payments that occur on a monthly 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
basis may appear to be duplicate payments when, in fact, they are simply regularly occurring 
payments. Note also that certain accounting packages allow the issuance of partial payments 
(e.g., a payment to the same vendor with the same invoice number and amount). Therefore, 
the auditor should determine whether the system allows such payments and, if so, omit them 
prior to running this application. 
 
Voided checks should also be reviewed; if a payment is made first on a regular check and 
then on a voided one, only one payment was technically made. 
 
EMPLOYEE-TO-VENDOR ADDRESS MATCH 
This test identifies identical or similar fields between the master tables of vendors and 
employees in an attempt to identify fraudulent payments to employees. While this test 
explains how to complete this task for addresses, the same could be done for phone 
numbers, tax identification numbers, and other personal information. 
 
Once the results are produced, the auditor should  scan them to determine if there are any 
valid address matches between the employee and vendor tables. As a next step, a Query 
Sheet could be created of the actual invoices posted to any questionable vendor to determine 
if they are fraudulent. Two notes when completing this review are: 
• Because this exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or 
vendor information independent of the accounts payable department (who may be 
culpable for creating the false vendor account). 
• Because it is common to pay employee travel and entertainment expenses or employee 
advances, this should be the key reason to not consider the payments fraudulent. If 
possible, the vendor file should be filtered for all employee travel and entertainment 
vendor accounts prior to running this test. 
 
IDENTIFYING PAYMENTS MADE AFTER PERIOD END FOR VALID LIABILITIES AT PERIOD END 
This report works to identify unrecorded liabilities. A common scheme is for an  
organization to “hold” an invoice by not enterin g it into the system. Then, after period end, 
the invoice will be entered into the system, thereby evading the expense charge in the period 
under review. 
 
The invoices identified in this test should be reviewed for reasonableness and materiality. If 
not material, further test work may not be considered necessary. If material, trends may be 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.625 
identified in the types of invoices or the vendor. The final analysis should include pulling the 
actual invoices to determine whether they are for services rendered or products received 
before the period end. 
 
IDENTIFY EXCEEDED PURCHASE ORDERS 
This report works to identify authorization issues within an accounts payable process 
whereby the invoices paid exceed the approved purchase order amounts. Aside from 
assessing the authorized limits, this report tests the system control that should not allow an 
invoice to be paid above a predetermined limit (normally between 5 and 10 percent). 
The report may also highlight frauds: 
• In which a valid purchase order is provided to authorize payment, yet inflated payments 
are made to assist the fraudster in some way. 
• In which vendors working with an employee create a purchase order with valid unit 
prices, yet inflate those prices when the invoices are sent. 
 
This test may highlight a control issue within the computer system (which should check for 
exceeded purchase orders), or it may identify numerous overrides to the computer system. 
These overrides may be within the normal course of business (e.g., purchase order prices 
were meant to be at the invoice price rate, but were entered in error on the purchase order), 
but may also highlight fraudulent activity. Regardless, the auditor should walk through the 
process of entering a purchase order and associated invoices to understand the system 
controls. Once understood, the differences presented in this test can be investigated by 
vouching to purchase order and invoice documentation. 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for the General Ledger 
STRATIFY GENERAL LEDGER DETAIL INFORMATION 
Look at the multitude of activities in a gene ral ledger and ask yourself, “How can I survey 
this data in an extremely quick manner while efficiently planning my audit?” This test should 
provide the answer because it helps the auditor focus on large-dollar postings, while 
assessing the administrative burden of maintaining low-dollar activity. 
 
The stratification report should be reviewed for: 
• Unreasonably large balances for which the activity could be queried for recalculation and 
proper classification 
• A high number of transactions with low accumulated activity for possible consolidation 
• Planning detailed testing of the journal entry approval process 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.626   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
JOURNAL ENTRY GAP TESTS 
Gaps may signal incomplete data processing or, in the situation of journal entries, possible 
hidden entries. Usually, a method of documenting these occurrences, along with a review by 
an independent party, is sufficient to ensure the completeness and accuracy of processing. 
However, it is rare that a journal entry gap test is performed in the accounting department (it 
is more common in the accounts payable area related to the check sequence), so this may be 
the first time this test is being performed. 
 
Gaps in the journal entry sequence should be reviewed with the accounting department. The 
test work should answer the following questions: 
• What procedures are in place to document and approve all gaps in the sequences? 
• How are gaps communicated to management? 
 
IDENTIFY NONSTANDARD JOURNAL ENTRIES MADE IN A TIMEFRAME AFTER YEAR 
END RELATED TO SPECIFIC ACCOUNTS 
Nonstandard journal entries are generally those that are posted manually, rather than 
through an automated feed from a fixed asset or accounts receivable sub-ledger. Such entries 
are more prone to error and fraud mainly due to human error, the judgment applied to 
support the entry, and the possibility of an override by management in authorizing the entry. 
This is especially true for entries made just after year end (related to the prior year), as these 
entries are more prone to be adjustments for the fiscal year’s annual reporting. 
 
Given the above, the test for these entries should include: 
• Reviewing the journal entry and associated supporting documentation 
• Ensuring the approvals are appropriate for the size and nature of the journal entry 
• Assessing whether generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) are being applied 
 
SUMMARIZE ACTIVITY BY USER ACCOUNT 
This test looks for: 
• Standard names such as “default” or “test.” These names usually have equally simple 
passwords for a hacker to guess and should generally be avoided. Replacements to these 
generic user IDs would be specific IDs associated with the person using the system (e.g., 
“jsmith”). 
• Unrecognized or terminated employees. This test focuses on the responsiveness within 
the MIS function to ensure that only authorized employees have system access. Compare 
the list created by this test to an active employee roster to spot any violations. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.627 
• Users who have access beyond their level of responsibility. This access may highlight a 
nonsegregation of duties in which a person has an opportunity to commit fraud by being 
able to initiate, authorize, and/or record a transaction. 
 
The resulting report should be reviewed bearing in mind the above considerations. 
Recommended steps include: 
• Delete default passwords and replace them with specific IDs 
• Delete employees who are not on the active employee roster 
• Review users who are posting high activity or who may have access to other non-
 segregated functions and assess whether other controls are needed to mitigate the such 
individuals’ access 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for Revenue 
MISSING/UNUSUAL CUSTOMER  MASTERFILE INFORMATION/MATCH TO PRIOR YEAR 
FOR CHANGES 
This report will identify changes in the customer masterfile, such as additions and deletions. 
Given that most systems do not track the changes in the customer masterfile (e.g., there is 
no “Last Maintained on Date” field), this report is sometimes the only means of determining 
changes in the customer master.  
 
The fraud examiner should review major additions and/or deletions to the customer 
masterfile. Given that there is a high potential for fraud on newly added customers (e.g., 
posting false sales invoices to phony customer accounts to inflate period-end sales balances), 
the names and addresses for such customers should be reviewed against employees with the 
ability to enter invoices into the system. This can be done using the accounts payable test 
described in this book that matched vendor addresses to employee addresses. Since this 
exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or customer files 
independent of the accounts receivable department (which may be culpable for creating the 
false customer accounts). 
 
CASH RECEIPT TO OPEN INVOICE MATCHING 
This test helps assess the existence and valuation of open invoices at period end based on 
the cash received subsequent to year end. Therefore, it is one of the most popular tests used 
by fraud examiners in assessing the existence of period end invoices. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.628   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Based on this test, the fraud examiner can easily assess whether open invoices were paid with 
cash (and therefore existed at year end), and for those still outstanding, whether they should 
be reviewed further from the perspective of year-end valuation. Such invoices probably 
relate to customers who regularly pay late, but they could represent new customer payment 
issues and/or fraudulent sales posted at year-end that will never receive cash. 
 
AGE RECEIVABLES, EXTRACT OLDER BALANCES, AND SUMMARIZE BY CUSTOMER 
This test mainly recalculates the aging of the invoices in the accounts receivable ledger for 
review against the company-derived report. Any differences between this calculation and the 
report used by management may be due to a system error, a poorly designed report, or fraud. 
To orchestrate fraud, management may hide the true payment patterns of customers to 
minimize their bad debt valuation reserve at year end. 
 
The aging report should be reconciled to the organization’s accounts receivable aging report. 
Any differences should be investigated. One approach is to extract a sampling of invoices 
(see previous test on reviewing a sample of invoices) within a specific aging group and 
reconcile to the aging report on an invoice by invoice basis. This work may identify report 
errors or an attempt by the organization to hide the true aging of accounts receivable.  
The focus of test work should be on more current aging categories that may be 
inappropriately inflated. 
 
Once the invoices are summarized by customer, the aging report also highlights customer 
balances, older than a pre-defined “old” limit. This may be 180 or 270 days after which 
payment of such invoices is unlikely. Large customer balances could be reviewed with 
management as to their collectability and, possibly, with the actual customer. This analysis 
would further support the year-end bad debt reserve calculation. 
 
CALCULATE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHIP AND INVOICE DATES, AS WELL AS INVOICE DATES WITH NO SHIPMENTS 
Untimely, erroneous, and/or fraudulent sales invoices may be detected if invoices are sent 
without valid shipments. In this case, revenue is potentially being recorded prior to being 
earned. Further research of these invoices should be done independent of the sales and 
accounts receivable functions in order to ensure an independent analysis. 
 
For more information about ActiveData for Excel, visit www.informationactive.com. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.629 
AutoAudit 
AutoAudit is a comprehensive, integrated audit automation system. In addition to the 
workpapers and reporting functionality, AutoAudit has entity-level and process-level risk 
assessment, staff scheduling, resource planning, issue tracking, time reporting, expense 
reporting, quality assurance, department metrics, and an ad hoc reporting module. All of 
these modules are integrated, and data automatically flows from one module into the next. 
AutoAudit is designed to automate all of the primary processes that occur in an audit 
department.  
 
Although AutoAudit automates many parts of any type of audit, of particular interest to 
fraud examiners are its risk assessment functions. AutoAudit offers an integrated risk 
assessment module with the option of following a horizontal methodology (business process 
risk assessment), a vertical methodology (audit universe made up of user-defined auditable 
entities), or a combination of both methodologies. Specific risks and processes are identified 
by the client, and the risk factors and weights can be customized to fit the specific needs of 
the department and industry. Information about the inherent and residual risks helps 
determine issues during the audit, and the information obtained during fieldwork can be 
pushed back into the risk assessment to use as the starting point for the next cycle of 
planning and auditing. 
 
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 
SNAP! Reporter 
Snap! Reporter is a data mining software program designed for use with Lotus Notes, 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, and Access databases.  Its chief virtue is its ease of use. Most 
software requires a familiarity with databases and data mining techniques, but anyone with 
basic spreadsheet skills can produce reports and graphics with this product. In Snap!, data 
retrieval and analysis are automated with one-button functions; some tasks are accomplished 
by drag-and-drop.  
 
Snap! produces Gantt Charts (i.e., graphical representations of projects) and counts 
occurrences of key words rather than only charting actual numbers. The software also 
creates stacked non-columnar reports and generates multiple Relationized Data Sets from 
one originating record—functions not available in other products. Snap! is not as powerful 
as some other data mining software, but it is easier to use. It is adequate to most tasks, 
though some complex cases may need a stronger package. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 
DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
Monarch is report-mining software. Monarch is unique because it extracts data from existing 
reports created by other programs, and then converts the data into actionable data (e.g., text 
files, spreadsheets, or database tables). For example, electronic data that is retrieved from an 
accounting system, or downloaded from an online source, can be broken down into 
individual records by Monarch’s model. Monarch can read report files produced on any 
mainframe, midrange, client/server, or PC system. These files are commonly known as print 
files, spool files, TXT files, formatted ASCII files, PRN files, and SDF files. Monarch can 
also read DBF files and delimited ASCII files.  
 
Once the data is actionable, it can be analyzed. That is, the records can be manipulated by 
data analysis applications like Access and Excel. 
 
Monarch specializes in reading complex reports in ASCII (plain text) format. Its data mining 
capabilities are useful for data integrity testing. Monarch can be used by itself or in tandem 
with other audit software such as ACL., but it will provide the most benefit when used in 
conjunction with another data analysis tool. 
 
Monarch serves three main functions for investigators: 
• Performs automated auditing tests and tests of various program controls 
• Verifies data on management or exter nal party report-generation accuracy 
• Proactively identifies errors and fraudulent activity 
 
Moreover, examiners can use Monarch to perform several functions in a financial analysis or  
risk assessment: 
• Summary window: To summarize information by a different criteria than the report did 
• Sorting data within the Table window: To generate an alphabetically sorted list or to identify 
the largest or smallest transactions 
• Time series analysis : To compile information from 12 separate reports into a month-by-
 month summary, allowing the investigator to identify trends 
• Graphing data within the Summary window : To graph any information in the Summary 
window into a pie, area, line, or bar chart quickly to visualize composition, trends, or 
distribution (this chart function is much more straightforward than in spreadsheet 
programs, such as MS Excel and Lotus 1-2-3) 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.631 
• Create calculated fields: To perform custom calculations on ex isting data fields or new fields 
not present in the original file 
 
Here are a few practical examples of Monarch’s investigative capabilities. The software 
allows investigators to: 
• View the 20 largest vendors by invoice am ount to compare the amounts with their 
expectations of those amounts 
• Summarize by purchase order number to determine if the sum of all transactions related 
to a purchase order exceed the amount authorized by the purchase order 
• Measure transaction volume and amount processed by each input clerk to identify 
unusual activity 
• Compare budget versus actual figures by computing a difference field 
• Chart customer delinquency trends for the past 12 months 
 
For more information about Monarch, visit www.datawatch.com. 
 
Arbutus Query 
Arbutus Query is a comprehensive query tool with built-in data-analysis capabilities. With 
Arbutus Query, users are able to query a wide range of data sources without having to know 
the location or structure of the underlying data. Arbutus Query employs Arbutus Analyzer to 
provide direct, read-only queries of data. Arbutus Analyzer uses a familiar spreadsheet 
interface to browse, analyze, or report on the data. The software can handle unlimited file 
sizes and has powerful data analysis and manipulation commands that support even the most 
advanced tasks.  
 
For more information on the Arbutus programs, visit www.arbutussoftware.com. 
 
Oversight Systems 
Oversight Systems offers software that helps businesses check for fraud, errors, and other 
problems. Its software provides continuous monitoring and continuous auditing with 
investigation, resolution, and tracking capabilities for continuous protection against fraud, 
misuse, and errors in business transactions. Oversight’s products also identify errors and 
control violations as they happen, so companies can address these issues when they are less 
complex and less costly to correct. Oversight’s products include features that integrate 
investigation, reconciliation, and documentation of data. For more information, visit 
www.oversightsystems.com. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.632   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


type of data mine and analysi softwar
there ar mani type of data mine and data analysi softwar on the market these dai
and everi year new product and new version of old product emerg becaus everi fraud
examin involv data analysi is differ it would be imposs to recommend on
softwar product to serv everi purpos choos a data analysi tool is someth that the
fraud examin must evalu on each individu case a fraud examin should research
applic intens to decid which packag is most appropri for the current
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3616 2011 fraud examin manual
data mine and knowledg discoveri softwar ar gener classifi into the follow
categori
public domainsharewarefreewar thi type of softwar is avail free or for a
nomin charg through websit ftp site and newsgroup mani sharewar program
such as wink sda allow user a trial period after which thei must pai a fee to
reactiv the softwar freewar howev is avail at no cost or for an option fee
these type of program can be locat through internet search engin and through
softwar download servic such as zdnet
beta softwar beta softwar is prereleas softwar that is still in test mode gener
thi type of softwar is free and user ar ask to review the softwar perform
report malfunct and so on
commerci applic commerci applic ar gener releas product that
usual come with technic support and warranti the most promin commerci
applic which ar discuss below includ
acl
idea
excel
activedata for excel
autoaudit
snap report
datawatch corpor monarch for window
arbutu queri
oversight system
acl
acl is a gener audit softwar program it is on of the prefer softwar tool of
audit and financi profession for data extract data analysi fraud detect and
continu monitor acl provid a combinat ion of data access analysi and integr
report it read and compar enterpris dataflat or relat databas spreadsheet
or report file on pc or server allow the sourc data to remain intact acl emploi a
singl consist client interfac and provid easi immedi access to data
command ar alreadi preprogram for data analysi autom your analysi through
continu monitor and realtim notif
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3617
with acl you can
analyz data independ from your it depart with a user interfac pulldown
menu toolbar and pointandclick command
analyz transact data in file of ani size to ensur 100percent coverag and
confid in your result
produc report
identifi trend pinpoint except and highlight potenti area of concern
locat error and potenti fraud by compar and analyz file accord to end
user criteria
identifi control issu and ensur complianc with standard
for more inform visit wwwaclcom
idea
like acl idea interact data extract and analysi is a gener audit softwar
program more specif it is a pcbase file interrog packag that allow
account auditor and financi manag to view sampl and analyz data from ani
other computer system thi softwar provid some function previous onli
avail to electron data process edp auditor and system specialist idea let the
user make inquiri of data file perform random unit sampl and calcul total and
averag the softwar will perform specif criteria search unusu item queri and
identifi gap or duplic in sequenc addition to differenti normal audit pattern
from suspect on examin can us idea to perform data analysi us benford law
addition idea includ a number of tool to prevent and detect fraud includ
person vet tool the power to author transact independ and the abil to
observ employe thi softwar consid purchas payrol and bank the most
common place for the occurr of fraud
gener function
idea gener function ar discuss below
file file manag and file manipul
idea file manag and manipul applic allow the user to importexport file
from almost ani format includ xml and specif account packag us an easi
industrystandard file manag program gener a singl databas from sever other
data analysi and report tool investig
3618 2011 fraud examin manual
databas us a comparedatabas option to identifi differ in a numer field within
two file for a common kei combin field from two databas into a singl databas to test
for data match across file and us the appenddatabas option concaten two or more
file into a singl databas for audit test
data applic
with idea data applic user can exercis extract or except test to identifi
item that satisfi a specif characterist the equat editor allow you to creat simpl or
veri complex extract and the function ar us to perform more complex
calcul and except test the search function can seek text or numer valu
across select field in multipl databas us standard or advanc search techniqu
idea duplic can identifi item within a databas in which up to eight field of
inform ar the same user can also search for gap in numer sequenc or
alphanumer sequenc with a userdefin mask the chart data option allow data file
to be graph or test result exhibit in bar stack bar pie plot or area chart data
action field allow user to set up relationship across multipl file
sampl
idea offer five sampl method with the abil to calcul sampl size base on
paramet enter and evalu the result of sampl test the sampl method
avail ar systemat random stratifi random monetari unit and classic variabl
sampl
analysi
idea analysi applic allow user to appli benford law stratif
summar ag and pivot tabl to raw data
product
with the product applic there ar sever differ function that can displai the
data save the oper carri out on a databas gener statist for all numer and
date field within a databas and creat a script with the help of objectori
program languag
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3619
fraud test
fraud examin and auditor can us idea data analysi applic to identifi potenti
sign of fraud the follow ar a few exampl of the type of fraud scheme that
examin can identifi with idea data analys applic
employe fraud
identifi employe account at financi institut that have excess number of credit
memo
identifi employe account at financi institut that have larg deposit
compar employe home address social secur number telephon number and
bank rout and account number to those of vendor from vendor master file
at financi institut compar employe social secur number against those of
deposit and loan account to identifi those not properli code as employe account
analyz all debit to incom account particularli debit memo
monitor the activ in suspens account includ the ag of suspens item and the
roll of similar amount
analyz claim paid by corpor medic insur provid
obtain a social secur number list from an outsid vendor to test for valid social
secur number and determin whether the holder is aliv or deceas
question invoic
identifi invoic without a valid purchas order
look for invoic from vendor not in the approvedvendor file
find invoic for more than on purchas order author
identifi multipl invoic with the same item descript
extract vendor with duplic invoic number
look for multipl invoic for the same amount on the same date
find invoic payment issu on nonbusi dai saturdai and sundai
identifi multipl invoic at or just under approv cutoff level
phantom vendor scheme
match name address phone number and social secur number between
employe and vendor file
check vendor address against mail drop address list
data analysi and report tool investig
3620 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback or conflict of interest scheme
look for vendor price greater than the standard
identifi price increas greater than accept percentag
check for continu purchas in spite of high rate of return reject or credit
look for high volum purchas from on vendor
dormant account scheme
check that all applic account have been flag as dormant
identifi dormant account with activ
check for transfer from dormant account to employe account
check chang of address on dormant account crosscheck new address with
employe address
monei launder scheme
identifi account with larg averag valu of transact it is common for there to be
a small number of highvalu transact through an account be us for monei
launder
identifi match debit and credit transact on the same account within a short time
period
search for larg round transact valu
identifi multipl account for particular individu
identifi larg cash deposit
test custom identif procedur by search for miss data field such as date
of birth social secur number or driver licens number
cross check custom address against mail drop address list
for more inform about idea visit wwwaudimationcom
excel
excel is a spreadsheet program by microsoft that can be us for store organ and
manipul data mani account auditor and fraud examin us excel for basic data
analysi task for exampl excel allow user to sort subtot filter and merg data thei
can creat calcul field as well as perform statist analysi such as regress
excel howev ha mani limit that limit it us for detect fraud these
limit ar discuss in the next section which examin activedata for excel
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3621
activedata for excel
activedata for microsoft excel is an easytous tool for advanc data manipul and
analysi within the excel environ
activedata for excel wa design to overcom excel mani limit
excel limit activedata for excel compens
doe not document the fraud
examin work in easytoaccess
log for refer and storag
activedata for excel provid a log of each
process step as a comment in cell a1 of the
worksheet creat then us the index sheet
function a summari page of all comment field
can easili be creat for review in essenc
creat an audit log of all work perform with
the spreadsheet data
ha difficulti perform data
analysi and manag test such
as relat tabl although it can be
accomplish it is an oner task
activedata for excel provid more than 100
dataanalysi and manag featur that
autom function some of which mai be
possibl but extrem difficult in excel
doe not have function
specif tailor to the fraud
examin for exampl an examin
can calcul a sampl in just a coupl
of click with minim train us
specif design audit softwar
in excel it can be done but it doe
take much effort and guidanc
activedata for excel ha more than 100 featur
that ar tailor to the auditor account and
fraud examin for exampl you can us
activedata for excel to find duplic record in
a few click rather than set up complex
formula in excel
the follow ar some exampl of how activedata can be us for fraud detect
fraud detect techniqu for account payabl
vendor summari total period on to period two comparison
thi is a basic analyt report to identifi trend in a vendor purchas histori a trend
analysi should be complet to identifi kei vendor with whom activ ha increas or
decreas substanti thi can best be assess us the dollar and percentag varianc
field which can be ad as calcul field in excel base on the chang in the busi
data analysi and report tool investig
3622 2011 fraud examin manual
environ andor new compani project a reason assess should be
perform on the vendor chang
descript statisticsbenford law analysi
descript statist provid maximum amount minimum amount averag amount and
other highlevel statist these statist should be review for reason for
exampl a high number of neg amount or a maximum amount that look too high
might not be reason
after obtain the descript statist of a data set the softwar provid a benford law
analysi of the first two digit of the data as well as a list of all amount from highest to
lowest frequenc for review
to review benford law distinguish between natur and nonnatur number natur
number ar those number that ar not order in a particular number scheme and ar not
gener from a random number system for exampl most account payabl file will be
popul by dollar valu that ar natur number convers nonnatur number like
social secur number and telephon number ar design systemat to convei
inform that restrict the natur natur of the number
benford law provid that the distribut of the initi digit in natur number is not
random instead it follow a predict pattern the tabl below show the expect
occurr for the distribut of the first digit in natur number accord to thi law
first digit probabl
1 301
2 176
3 125
4 97
5 79
6 67
7 58
8 51
9 46
total 1000
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3623
that is benford law maintain that certain di git show up more than other do a 1 will
appear as the first nonzero digit roughli 30 percent of the time 2 will be the lead digit
almost 18 percent of the time 9 will lead o ff onli 46 percent of the time moreov zero
is most like to be the second digit appear 12 percent of the time
benford law make it possibl to detect fraudul number in larg data file by
compar the frequenc of the appear of initi digit in a list of number to those
anticip by benford law for exampl when embezzl invent number thei tend to
fake data contain too mani instanc of initi digit of 7 8 and 9 and too few
instanc of 1 2 and 3 thu with benford law examin can tell if someon
fake data that ar deriv from other data and thei can also identifi error within the data
that appear out of place given the data frequenc of appear
the benford law analysi should be execut first so the most statist outlier can be
review
furthermor as a follow up to these test examin should us a queri sheet to queri
outlier activ for addit review
aboveaverag payment to a vendor more than two time the averag
unusu larg payment to a vendor in relat to the averag ar a sign of error eg a
keypunch error or fraud eg a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid addit
amount that ar kickedback to the employe enter the payment into the system
for vendor with unusu payment abov the averag a sampl of the averag payment
invoic as well as the unusu payment invoic should be review the reason of
the purchas should be assess base on the document review the auditor should
be keenli awar of the potenti for a keypunch error regard the unusu payment
andor the possibl of the vendor purpos overcharg the organ
duplic payment test
duplic payment to vendor normal repres error that the comput system wa
unabl to detect in most system a check will be made as to whether the vendor number
invoic number and amount ar the same thi test could be run to ensur thi basic control
is oper and also to test for other permut of duplic ani result from thi
test should be review first for trend for exampl rent payment that occur on a monthli
data analysi and report tool investig
3624 2011 fraud examin manual
basi mai appear to be duplic payment when in fact thei ar simpli regularli occur
payment note also that certain account packag allow the issuanc of partial payment
eg a payment to the same vendor with the same invoic number and amount therefor
the auditor should determin whether the system allow such payment and if so omit them
prior to run thi applic
void check should also be review if a payment is made first on a regular check and
then on a void on onli on payment wa technic made
employeetovendor address match
thi test identifi ident or similar field between the master tabl of vendor and
employe in an attempt to identifi fraudul payment to employe while thi test
explain how to complet thi task for address the same could be done for phone
number tax identif number and other person inform
onc the result ar produc the auditor should scan them to determin if there ar ani
valid address match between the employe and vendor tabl as a next step a queri
sheet could be creat of the actual invoic post to ani question vendor to determin
if thei ar fraudul two note when complet thi review ar
becaus thi exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or
vendor inform independ of the account payabl depart who mai be
culpabl for creat the fals vendor account
becaus it is common to pai employe travel and entertain expens or employe
advanc thi should be the kei reason to not consid the payment fraudul if
possibl the vendor file should be filter for all employe travel and entertain
vendor account prior to run thi test
identifi payment made after period end for valid liabil at period end
thi report work to identifi unrecord liabil a common scheme is for an
organ to hold an invoic by not enterin g it into the system then after period end
the invoic will be enter into the system therebi evad the expens charg in the period
under review
the invoic identifi in thi test should be review for reason and materi if
not materi further test work mai not be consid necessari if materi trend mai be
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3625
identifi in the type of invoic or the vendor the final analysi should includ pull the
actual invoic to determin whether thei ar for servic render or product receiv
befor the period end
identifi exceed purchas order
thi report work to identifi author issu within an account payabl process
wherebi the invoic paid exce the approv purchas order amount asid from
assess the author limit thi report test the system control that should not allow an
invoic to be paid abov a predetermin limit normal between 5 and 10 percent
the report mai also highlight fraud
in which a valid purchas order is provid to author payment yet inflat payment
ar made to assist the fraudster in some wai
in which vendor work with an employe creat a purchas order with valid unit
price yet inflat those price when the invoic ar sent
thi test mai highlight a control issu within the comput system which should check for
exceed purchas order or it mai identifi numer overrid to the comput system
these overrid mai be within the normal cours of busi eg purchas order price
were meant to be at the invoic price rate but were enter in error on the purchas order
but mai also highlight fraudul activ regardless the auditor should walk through the
process of enter a purchas order and associ invoic to understand the system
control onc understood the differ present in thi test can be investig by
vouch to purchas order and invoic document
fraud detect techniqu for the gener ledger
stratifi gener ledger detail inform
look at the multitud of activ in a gene ral ledger and ask yourself how can i survei
thi data in an extrem quick manner while effici plan my audit thi test should
provid the answer becaus it help the auditor focu on largedollar post while
assess the administr burden of maintain lowdollar activ
the stratif report should be review for
unreason larg balanc for which the activ could be queri for recalcul and
proper classif
a high number of transact with low accumul activ for possibl consolid
plan detail test of the journal entri approv process
data analysi and report tool investig
3626 2011 fraud examin manual
journal entri gap test
gap mai signal incomplet data process or in the situat of journal entri possibl
hidden entri usual a method of document these occurr along with a review by
an independ parti is suffici to ensur the complet and accuraci of process
howev it is rare that a journal entri gap test is perform in the account depart it
is more common in the account payabl area relat to the check sequenc so thi mai be
the first time thi test is be perform
gap in the journal entri sequenc should be review with the account depart the
test work should answer the follow question
what procedur ar in place to document and approv all gap in the sequenc
how ar gap commun to manag
identifi nonstandard journal entri made in a timefram after year
end relat to specif account
nonstandard journal entri ar gener those that ar post manual rather than
through an autom feed from a fix asset or account receiv subledg such entri
ar more prone to error and fraud mainli due to human error the judgment appli to
support the entri and the possibl of an overrid by manag in author the entri
thi is especi true for entri made just after year end relat to the prior year as these
entri ar more prone to be adjust for the fiscal year annual report
given the abov the test for these entri should includ
review the journal entri and associ support document
ensur the approv ar appropri for the size and natur of the journal entri
assess whether gener accept account principl gaap ar be appli
summar activ by user account
thi test look for
standard name such as default or test these name usual have equal simpl
password for a hacker to guess and should gener be avoid replac to these
gener user id would be specif id associ with the person us the system eg
jsmith
unrecogn or termin employe thi test focus on the respons within
the mi function to ensur that onli author employe have system access compar
the list creat by thi test to an activ employe roster to spot ani violat
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3627
user who have access beyond their level of respons thi access mai highlight a
nonsegreg of duti in which a person ha an opportun to commit fraud by be
abl to initi author andor record a transact
the result report should be review bear in mind the abov consider
recommend step includ
delet default password and replac them with specif id
delet employe who ar not on the activ employe roster
review user who ar post high activ or who mai have access to other non
segreg function and assess whether other control ar need to mitig the such
individu access
fraud detect techniqu for revenu
missingunusu custom masterfil informationmatch to prior year
for chang
thi report will identifi chang in the custom masterfil such as addit and delet
given that most system do not track the chang in the custom masterfil eg there is
no last maintain on date field thi report is sometim the onli mean of determin
chang in the custom master
the fraud examin should review major addit andor delet to the custom
masterfil given that there is a high potenti for fraud on newli ad custom eg
post fals sale invoic to phoni custom account to inflat periodend sale balanc
the name and address for such custom should be review against employe with the
abil to enter invoic into the system thi can be done us the account payabl test
describ in thi book that match vendor address to employe address sinc thi
exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or custom file
independ of the account receiv depart which mai be culpabl for creat the
fals custom account
cash receipt to open invoic match
thi test help assess the exist and valuat of open invoic at period end base on
the cash receiv subsequ to year end therefor it is on of the most popular test us
by fraud examin in assess the exist of period end invoic
data analysi and report tool investig
3628 2011 fraud examin manual
base on thi test the fraud examin can easili assess whether open invoic were paid with
cash and therefor exist at year end and for those still outstand whether thei should
be review further from the perspect of yearend valuat such invoic probabl
relat to custom who regularli pai late but thei could repres new custom payment
issu andor fraudul sale post at yearend that will never receiv cash
ag receiv extract older balanc and summar by custom
thi test mainli recalcul the ag of the invoic in the account receiv ledger for
review against the companyderiv report ani differ between thi calcul and the
report us by manag mai be due to a system error a poorli design report or fraud
to orchestr fraud manag mai hide the true payment pattern of custom to
minim their bad debt valuat reserv at year end
the ag report should be reconcil to the organ account receiv ag report
ani differ should be investig on approach is to extract a sampl of invoic
see previou test on review a sampl of invoic within a specif ag group and
reconcil to the ag report on an invoic by invoic basi thi work mai identifi report
error or an attempt by the organ to hide the true ag of account receiv
the focu of test work should be on more current ag categori that mai be
inappropri inflat
onc the invoic ar summar by custom the ag report also highlight custom
balanc older than a predefin old limit thi mai be 180 or 270 dai after which
payment of such invoic is unlik larg custom balanc could be review with
manag as to their collect and possibl with the actual custom thi analysi
would further support the yearend bad debt reserv calcul
calcul the differ between ship and invoic date as well as invoic date with no shipment
untim erron andor fraudul sale invoic mai be detect if invoic ar sent
without valid shipment in thi case revenu is potenti be record prior to be
earn further research of these invoic should be done independ of the sale and
account receiv function in order to ensur an independ analysi
for more inform about activedata for excel visit wwwinformationactivecom
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3629
autoaudit
autoaudit is a comprehens integr audit autom system in addit to the
workpap and report function autoaudit ha entitylevel and processlevel risk
assess staff schedul resourc plan issu track time report expens
report qualiti assur depart metric and an ad hoc report modul all of
these modul ar integr and data automat flow from on modul into the next
autoaudit is design to autom all of the primari process that occur in an audit
depart
although autoaudit autom mani part of ani type of audit of particular interest to
fraud examin ar it risk assess function autoaudit offer an integr risk
assess modul with the option of follow a horizont methodolog busi process
risk assess a vertic methodolog audit univers made up of userdefin audit
entiti or a combin of both methodolog specif risk and process ar identifi
by the client and the risk factor and weight can be custom to fit the specif need of
the depart and industri inform about the inher and residu risk help
determin issu dure the audit and the inform obtain dure fieldwork can be
push back into the risk assess to us as the start point for the next cycl of
plan and audit
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
snap report
snap report is a data mine softwar program design for us with lotu note
microsoft excel spreadsheet and access databas it chief virtu is it eas of us most
softwar requir a familiar with databas and data mine techniqu but anyon with
basic spreadsheet skill can produc report and graphic with thi product in snap data
retriev and analysi ar autom with onebutton function some task ar accomplish
by draganddrop
snap produc gantt chart ie graphic represent of project and count
occurr of kei word rather than onli chart actual number the softwar also
creat stack noncolumnar report and gener multipl relation data set from
on origin recordfunct not avail in other product snap is not as power
as some other data mine softwar but it is easier to us it is adequ to most task
though some complex case mai need a stronger packag
data analysi and report tool investig
3630 2011 fraud examin manual
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
datawatch corpor monarch for window
monarch is reportmin softwar monarch is uniqu becaus it extract data from exist
report creat by other program and then convert the data into action data eg text
file spreadsheet or databas tabl for exampl electron data that is retriev from an
account system or download from an onlin sourc can be broken down into
individu record by monarch model monarch can read report file produc on ani
mainfram midrang clientserv or pc system these file ar commonli known as print
file spool file txt file format ascii file prn file and sdf file monarch can
also read dbf file and delimit ascii file
onc the data is action it can be analyz that is the record can be manipul by
data analysi applic like access and excel
monarch special in read complex report in ascii plain text format it data mine
capabl ar us for data integr test monarch can be us by itself or in tandem
with other audit softwar such as acl but it will provid the most benefit when us in
conjunct with anoth data analysi tool
monarch serv three main function for investig
perform autom audit test and test of variou program control
verifi data on manag or exter nal parti reportgener accuraci
proactiv identifi error and fraudul activ
moreov examin can us monarch to perform sever function in a financi analysi or
risk assess
summari window to summar inform by a differ criteria than the report did
sort data within the tabl window to gener an alphabet sort list or to identifi
the largest or smallest transact
time seri analysi to compil inform from 12 separ report into a monthbi
month summari allow the investig to identifi trend
graph data within the summari window to graph ani inform in the summari
window into a pie area line or bar chart quickli to visual composit trend or
distribut thi chart function is much more straightforward than in spreadsheet
program such as ms excel and lotu 123
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3631
creat calcul field to perform custom calcul on ex ist data field or new field
not present in the origin file
here ar a few practic exampl of monarch investig capabl the softwar
allow investig to
view the 20 largest vendor by invoic am ount to compar the amount with their
expect of those amount
summar by purchas order number to determin if the sum of all transact relat
to a purchas order exce the amount author by the purchas order
measur transact volum and amount process by each input clerk to identifi
unusu activ
compar budget versu actual figur by comput a differ field
chart custom delinqu trend for the past 12 month
for more inform about monarch visit wwwdatawatchcom
arbutu queri
arbutu queri is a comprehens queri tool with builtin dataanalysi capabl with
arbutu queri user ar abl to queri a wide rang of data sourc without have to know
the locat or structur of the underli data arbutu queri emploi arbutu analyz to
provid direct readonli queri of data arbutu analyz us a familiar spreadsheet
interfac to brows analyz or report on the data the softwar can handl unlimit file
size and ha power data analysi and manipul command that support even the most
advanc task
for more inform on the arbutu program visit wwwarbutussoftwarecom
oversight system
oversight system offer softwar that help busi check for fraud error and other
problem it softwar provid continu monitor and continu audit with
investig resolut and track capabl for continu protect against fraud
misus and error in busi transact oversight product also identifi error and
control violat as thei happen so compani can address these issu when thei ar less
complex and less costli to correct oversight product includ featur that integr
investig reconcili and document of data for more inform visit
wwwoversightsystemscom
data analysi and report tool investig
3632 2011 fraud examin manual
