2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software/Fraud Detection Techniques for Accounts Payable


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Fraud Detection Techniques for Accounts Payable 
VENDOR SUMMARY TOTALS PERIOD ONE TO PERIOD TWO COMPARISON 
This is a basic analytical report to identify trends in a vendor’s purchase history. A trend 
analysis should be completed to identify key vendors with whom activity has increased or 
decreased substantially. This can best be assessed using the dollar and percentage variance 
fields, which can be added as calculated fields in Excel. Based on the changes in the business 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.622   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
environment and/or new company projects, a reasonableness assessment should be 
performed on the vendor changes. 
 
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS/BENFORD’S LAW ANALYSIS 
Descriptive statistics provide maximum amount, minimum amount, average amount, and 
other high-level statistics. These statistics should be reviewed for reasonableness; for 
example, a high number of negative amounts or a maximum amount that looks too high 
might not be reasonable. 
 
After obtaining the descriptive statistics of a data set, the software provides a Benford’s Law 
analysis of the first two digits of the data, as well as a list of all amounts from highest to 
lowest frequency, for review.  
 
To review, Benford’s Law distinguishes between natural and non-natural numbers. Natural 
numbers  are those numbers that are not ordered in a particular numbering scheme and are not 
generated from a random number system. For example, most accounts payable files will be 
populated by dollar values that are natural numbers. Conversely, non-natural numbers  like 
Social Security numbers and telephone numbers are designed systematically to convey 
information that restricts the natural nature of the number. 
 
Benford’s Law provides that the distribution of the initial digits in natural numbers is not 
random; instead, it follows a predictable pattern. The table below shows the expected 
occurrence for the distribution of the first digit in natural numbers, according to this law: 
 
First Digit Probability
 1 30.1%
 2 17.6%
 3 12.5%
 4 9.7%
 5 7.9%
 6 6.7%
 7 5.8%
 8 5.1%
 9 4.6%
 Total 100.0%
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.623 
That is, Benford’s Law maintains that certain di gits show up more than others do. A “1” will 
appear as the first non-zero digit roughly 30 percent of the time; “2” will be the leading digit 
almost 18 percent of the time; “9” will lead o ff only 4.6 percent of the time. Moreover, zero 
is most likely to be the second digit, appearing 12 percent of the time.  
 
Benford’s Law makes it possible to detect fraudulent numbers in large data files by 
comparing the frequency of the appearance of initial digits in a list of numbers to those 
anticipated by Benford’s Law. For example, when embezzlers invent numbers, they tend to 
fake data containing too many instances of initial digits of “7,” “8,” and “9” and too few 
instances of “1,” “2,” and “3.” Thus, with Benford’s Law, examiners can tell if someone 
fakes data that are derived from other data, and they can also identify errors within the data 
that appear “out of place” given the data’s frequency of appearance. 
 
The Benford’s Law analysis should be executed first so the most statistical outliers can be 
reviewed.  
 
Furthermore, as a follow up to these tests, examiners should use a Query Sheet to query 
outlier activity for additional review. 
 
ABOVE-AVERAGE PAYMENTS TO A VENDOR (MORE THAN TWO TIMES THE AVERAGE) 
Unusually large payments to a vendor in relation to the average are a sign of error (e.g., a 
key-punch error) or fraud (e.g., a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid additional 
amounts that are kicked-back to the employee entering the payment into the system). 
 
For vendors with unusual payments above the average, a sample of the “average” payment 
invoices, as well as the unusual payment invoices should be reviewed. The reasonableness of 
the purchase should be assessed based on the documentation reviewed. The auditor should 
be keenly aware of the potential for a key-punch error regarding the unusual payment 
and/or the possibility of the vendor purposely overcharging the organization. 
 
DUPLICATE PAYMENT TESTING  
Duplicate payments to vendors normally represent errors that the computer system was 
unable to detect. In most systems, a check will be made as to whether the vendor number, 
invoice number, and amount are the same. This test could be run to ensure this basic control 
is operational and also to test for other permutations of duplication. Any results from this 
test should be reviewed first for trends. For example, rent payments that occur on a monthly 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
basis may appear to be duplicate payments when, in fact, they are simply regularly occurring 
payments. Note also that certain accounting packages allow the issuance of partial payments 
(e.g., a payment to the same vendor with the same invoice number and amount). Therefore, 
the auditor should determine whether the system allows such payments and, if so, omit them 
prior to running this application. 
 
Voided checks should also be reviewed; if a payment is made first on a regular check and 
then on a voided one, only one payment was technically made. 
 
EMPLOYEE-TO-VENDOR ADDRESS MATCH 
This test identifies identical or similar fields between the master tables of vendors and 
employees in an attempt to identify fraudulent payments to employees. While this test 
explains how to complete this task for addresses, the same could be done for phone 
numbers, tax identification numbers, and other personal information. 
 
Once the results are produced, the auditor should  scan them to determine if there are any 
valid address matches between the employee and vendor tables. As a next step, a Query 
Sheet could be created of the actual invoices posted to any questionable vendor to determine 
if they are fraudulent. Two notes when completing this review are: 
• Because this exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or 
vendor information independent of the accounts payable department (who may be 
culpable for creating the false vendor account). 
• Because it is common to pay employee travel and entertainment expenses or employee 
advances, this should be the key reason to not consider the payments fraudulent. If 
possible, the vendor file should be filtered for all employee travel and entertainment 
vendor accounts prior to running this test. 
 
IDENTIFYING PAYMENTS MADE AFTER PERIOD END FOR VALID LIABILITIES AT PERIOD END 
This report works to identify unrecorded liabilities. A common scheme is for an  
organization to “hold” an invoice by not enterin g it into the system. Then, after period end, 
the invoice will be entered into the system, thereby evading the expense charge in the period 
under review. 
 
The invoices identified in this test should be reviewed for reasonableness and materiality. If 
not material, further test work may not be considered necessary. If material, trends may be 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.625 
identified in the types of invoices or the vendor. The final analysis should include pulling the 
actual invoices to determine whether they are for services rendered or products received 
before the period end. 
 
IDENTIFY EXCEEDED PURCHASE ORDERS 
This report works to identify authorization issues within an accounts payable process 
whereby the invoices paid exceed the approved purchase order amounts. Aside from 
assessing the authorized limits, this report tests the system control that should not allow an 
invoice to be paid above a predetermined limit (normally between 5 and 10 percent). 
The report may also highlight frauds: 
• In which a valid purchase order is provided to authorize payment, yet inflated payments 
are made to assist the fraudster in some way. 
• In which vendors working with an employee create a purchase order with valid unit 
prices, yet inflate those prices when the invoices are sent. 
 
This test may highlight a control issue within the computer system (which should check for 
exceeded purchase orders), or it may identify numerous overrides to the computer system. 
These overrides may be within the normal course of business (e.g., purchase order prices 
were meant to be at the invoice price rate, but were entered in error on the purchase order), 
but may also highlight fraudulent activity. Regardless, the auditor should walk through the 
process of entering a purchase order and associated invoices to understand the system 
controls. Once understood, the differences presented in this test can be investigated by 
vouching to purchase order and invoice documentation. 
 



:


fraud detect techniqu for account payabl
vendor summari total period on to period two comparison
thi is a basic analyt report to identifi trend in a vendor purchas histori a trend
analysi should be complet to identifi kei vendor with whom activ ha increas or
decreas substanti thi can best be assess us the dollar and percentag varianc
field which can be ad as calcul field in excel base on the chang in the busi
data analysi and report tool investig
3622 2011 fraud examin manual
environ andor new compani project a reason assess should be
perform on the vendor chang
descript statisticsbenford law analysi
descript statist provid maximum amount minimum amount averag amount and
other highlevel statist these statist should be review for reason for
exampl a high number of neg amount or a maximum amount that look too high
might not be reason
after obtain the descript statist of a data set the softwar provid a benford law
analysi of the first two digit of the data as well as a list of all amount from highest to
lowest frequenc for review
to review benford law distinguish between natur and nonnatur number natur
number ar those number that ar not order in a particular number scheme and ar not
gener from a random number system for exampl most account payabl file will be
popul by dollar valu that ar natur number convers nonnatur number like
social secur number and telephon number ar design systemat to convei
inform that restrict the natur natur of the number
benford law provid that the distribut of the initi digit in natur number is not
random instead it follow a predict pattern the tabl below show the expect
occurr for the distribut of the first digit in natur number accord to thi law
first digit probabl
1 301
2 176
3 125
4 97
5 79
6 67
7 58
8 51
9 46
total 1000
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3623
that is benford law maintain that certain di git show up more than other do a 1 will
appear as the first nonzero digit roughli 30 percent of the time 2 will be the lead digit
almost 18 percent of the time 9 will lead o ff onli 46 percent of the time moreov zero
is most like to be the second digit appear 12 percent of the time
benford law make it possibl to detect fraudul number in larg data file by
compar the frequenc of the appear of initi digit in a list of number to those
anticip by benford law for exampl when embezzl invent number thei tend to
fake data contain too mani instanc of initi digit of 7 8 and 9 and too few
instanc of 1 2 and 3 thu with benford law examin can tell if someon
fake data that ar deriv from other data and thei can also identifi error within the data
that appear out of place given the data frequenc of appear
the benford law analysi should be execut first so the most statist outlier can be
review
furthermor as a follow up to these test examin should us a queri sheet to queri
outlier activ for addit review
aboveaverag payment to a vendor more than two time the averag
unusu larg payment to a vendor in relat to the averag ar a sign of error eg a
keypunch error or fraud eg a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid addit
amount that ar kickedback to the employe enter the payment into the system
for vendor with unusu payment abov the averag a sampl of the averag payment
invoic as well as the unusu payment invoic should be review the reason of
the purchas should be assess base on the document review the auditor should
be keenli awar of the potenti for a keypunch error regard the unusu payment
andor the possibl of the vendor purpos overcharg the organ
duplic payment test
duplic payment to vendor normal repres error that the comput system wa
unabl to detect in most system a check will be made as to whether the vendor number
invoic number and amount ar the same thi test could be run to ensur thi basic control
is oper and also to test for other permut of duplic ani result from thi
test should be review first for trend for exampl rent payment that occur on a monthli
data analysi and report tool investig
3624 2011 fraud examin manual
basi mai appear to be duplic payment when in fact thei ar simpli regularli occur
payment note also that certain account packag allow the issuanc of partial payment
eg a payment to the same vendor with the same invoic number and amount therefor
the auditor should determin whether the system allow such payment and if so omit them
prior to run thi applic
void check should also be review if a payment is made first on a regular check and
then on a void on onli on payment wa technic made
employeetovendor address match
thi test identifi ident or similar field between the master tabl of vendor and
employe in an attempt to identifi fraudul payment to employe while thi test
explain how to complet thi task for address the same could be done for phone
number tax identif number and other person inform
onc the result ar produc the auditor should scan them to determin if there ar ani
valid address match between the employe and vendor tabl as a next step a queri
sheet could be creat of the actual invoic post to ani question vendor to determin
if thei ar fraudul two note when complet thi review ar
becaus thi exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or
vendor inform independ of the account payabl depart who mai be
culpabl for creat the fals vendor account
becaus it is common to pai employe travel and entertain expens or employe
advanc thi should be the kei reason to not consid the payment fraudul if
possibl the vendor file should be filter for all employe travel and entertain
vendor account prior to run thi test
identifi payment made after period end for valid liabil at period end
thi report work to identifi unrecord liabil a common scheme is for an
organ to hold an invoic by not enterin g it into the system then after period end
the invoic will be enter into the system therebi evad the expens charg in the period
under review
the invoic identifi in thi test should be review for reason and materi if
not materi further test work mai not be consid necessari if materi trend mai be
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3625
identifi in the type of invoic or the vendor the final analysi should includ pull the
actual invoic to determin whether thei ar for servic render or product receiv
befor the period end
identifi exceed purchas order
thi report work to identifi author issu within an account payabl process
wherebi the invoic paid exce the approv purchas order amount asid from
assess the author limit thi report test the system control that should not allow an
invoic to be paid abov a predetermin limit normal between 5 and 10 percent
the report mai also highlight fraud
in which a valid purchas order is provid to author payment yet inflat payment
ar made to assist the fraudster in some wai
in which vendor work with an employe creat a purchas order with valid unit
price yet inflat those price when the invoic ar sent
thi test mai highlight a control issu within the comput system which should check for
exceed purchas order or it mai identifi numer overrid to the comput system
these overrid mai be within the normal cours of busi eg purchas order price
were meant to be at the invoic price rate but were enter in error on the purchas order
but mai also highlight fraudul activ regardless the auditor should walk through the
process of enter a purchas order and associ invoic to understand the system
control onc understood the differ present in thi test can be investig by
vouch to purchas order and invoic document
