2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software/Fraud Detection Techniques for Revenue


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Fraud Detection Techniques for Revenue 
MISSING/UNUSUAL CUSTOMER  MASTERFILE INFORMATION/MATCH TO PRIOR YEAR 
FOR CHANGES 
This report will identify changes in the customer masterfile, such as additions and deletions. 
Given that most systems do not track the changes in the customer masterfile (e.g., there is 
no “Last Maintained on Date” field), this report is sometimes the only means of determining 
changes in the customer master.  
 
The fraud examiner should review major additions and/or deletions to the customer 
masterfile. Given that there is a high potential for fraud on newly added customers (e.g., 
posting false sales invoices to phony customer accounts to inflate period-end sales balances), 
the names and addresses for such customers should be reviewed against employees with the 
ability to enter invoices into the system. This can be done using the accounts payable test 
described in this book that matched vendor addresses to employee addresses. Since this 
exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or customer files 
independent of the accounts receivable department (which may be culpable for creating the 
false customer accounts). 
 
CASH RECEIPT TO OPEN INVOICE MATCHING 
This test helps assess the existence and valuation of open invoices at period end based on 
the cash received subsequent to year end. Therefore, it is one of the most popular tests used 
by fraud examiners in assessing the existence of period end invoices. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.628   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Based on this test, the fraud examiner can easily assess whether open invoices were paid with 
cash (and therefore existed at year end), and for those still outstanding, whether they should 
be reviewed further from the perspective of year-end valuation. Such invoices probably 
relate to customers who regularly pay late, but they could represent new customer payment 
issues and/or fraudulent sales posted at year-end that will never receive cash. 
 
AGE RECEIVABLES, EXTRACT OLDER BALANCES, AND SUMMARIZE BY CUSTOMER 
This test mainly recalculates the aging of the invoices in the accounts receivable ledger for 
review against the company-derived report. Any differences between this calculation and the 
report used by management may be due to a system error, a poorly designed report, or fraud. 
To orchestrate fraud, management may hide the true payment patterns of customers to 
minimize their bad debt valuation reserve at year end. 
 
The aging report should be reconciled to the organization’s accounts receivable aging report. 
Any differences should be investigated. One approach is to extract a sampling of invoices 
(see previous test on reviewing a sample of invoices) within a specific aging group and 
reconcile to the aging report on an invoice by invoice basis. This work may identify report 
errors or an attempt by the organization to hide the true aging of accounts receivable.  
The focus of test work should be on more current aging categories that may be 
inappropriately inflated. 
 
Once the invoices are summarized by customer, the aging report also highlights customer 
balances, older than a pre-defined “old” limit. This may be 180 or 270 days after which 
payment of such invoices is unlikely. Large customer balances could be reviewed with 
management as to their collectability and, possibly, with the actual customer. This analysis 
would further support the year-end bad debt reserve calculation. 
 
CALCULATE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHIP AND INVOICE DATES, AS WELL AS INVOICE DATES WITH NO SHIPMENTS 
Untimely, erroneous, and/or fraudulent sales invoices may be detected if invoices are sent 
without valid shipments. In this case, revenue is potentially being recorded prior to being 
earned. Further research of these invoices should be done independent of the sales and 
accounts receivable functions in order to ensure an independent analysis. 
 
For more information about ActiveData for Excel, visit www.informationactive.com. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.629 



:


fraud detect techniqu for revenu
missingunusu custom masterfil informationmatch to prior year
for chang
thi report will identifi chang in the custom masterfil such as addit and delet
given that most system do not track the chang in the custom masterfil eg there is
no last maintain on date field thi report is sometim the onli mean of determin
chang in the custom master
the fraud examin should review major addit andor delet to the custom
masterfil given that there is a high potenti for fraud on newli ad custom eg
post fals sale invoic to phoni custom account to inflat periodend sale balanc
the name and address for such custom should be review against employe with the
abil to enter invoic into the system thi can be done us the account payabl test
describ in thi book that match vendor address to employe address sinc thi
exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or custom file
independ of the account receiv depart which mai be culpabl for creat the
fals custom account
cash receipt to open invoic match
thi test help assess the exist and valuat of open invoic at period end base on
the cash receiv subsequ to year end therefor it is on of the most popular test us
by fraud examin in assess the exist of period end invoic
data analysi and report tool investig
3628 2011 fraud examin manual
base on thi test the fraud examin can easili assess whether open invoic were paid with
cash and therefor exist at year end and for those still outstand whether thei should
be review further from the perspect of yearend valuat such invoic probabl
relat to custom who regularli pai late but thei could repres new custom payment
issu andor fraudul sale post at yearend that will never receiv cash
ag receiv extract older balanc and summar by custom
thi test mainli recalcul the ag of the invoic in the account receiv ledger for
review against the companyderiv report ani differ between thi calcul and the
report us by manag mai be due to a system error a poorli design report or fraud
to orchestr fraud manag mai hide the true payment pattern of custom to
minim their bad debt valuat reserv at year end
the ag report should be reconcil to the organ account receiv ag report
ani differ should be investig on approach is to extract a sampl of invoic
see previou test on review a sampl of invoic within a specif ag group and
reconcil to the ag report on an invoic by invoic basi thi work mai identifi report
error or an attempt by the organ to hide the true ag of account receiv
the focu of test work should be on more current ag categori that mai be
inappropri inflat
onc the invoic ar summar by custom the ag report also highlight custom
balanc older than a predefin old limit thi mai be 180 or 270 dai after which
payment of such invoic is unlik larg custom balanc could be review with
manag as to their collect and possibl with the actual custom thi analysi
would further support the yearend bad debt reserv calcul
calcul the differ between ship and invoic date as well as invoic date with no shipment
untim erron andor fraudul sale invoic mai be detect if invoic ar sent
without valid shipment in thi case revenu is potenti be record prior to be
earn further research of these invoic should be done independ of the sale and
account receiv function in order to ensur an independ analysi
for more inform about activedata for excel visit wwwinformationactivecom
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3629
