2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Reporting and Case Management Software


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Reporting and Case Management Software 
There are a number of programs that can assist the fraud examiner in managing the data and 
information gathered. These programs can also be used to create reports, graphs, and charts 
of a particular case. Some of the most useful of these programs for fraud investigations are 
discussed below. 
 
i2’s Analysis Product Line 
i2 offers a line of analytical tools that allow users to search, store, visualize and analyze data. 
Some of those tools are discussed below.  
 
Analyst’s Notebook 
i2 Inc. offers a professional visualization and analysis tool called Analyst’s Notebook. 
Analyst’s Notebook is a visual investigative analys is software program that brings clarity to 
complex investigations and intelligence analysis. It enables investigators and analysts to turn 
large volumes of disparate data into actionable intelligence. It creates charts and graphs to 
allow users to:  
• Visualize large volumes of investigative data to understand the big picture. 
• Reveal patterns and hidden connections to help focus the investigation. 
• Create analytical charts manually or automatically generate link and timeline charts from 
structured data. 
• Communicate complex cases with intuitive briefing charts that capture and organize 
supporting data. 
 
iBase 
iBase is i2’s investigative database that is. It allows users to configure a data store, capture 
data, and perform data analysis in a controlled environment.  
 
Data Miner 
Data Miner is a data mining application that can only be installed with Analyst’s 
Workstation. It allows users to analyze large amounts of data and find any patterns that may 
exist.  
 
Analyst’s Workstation 
Analyst’s Workstation is an integrated collection of analytical tools, including Analyst's 
Notebook, iBase, and Data Miner. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.633 
For more information on i2’s product line, visit www.i2inc.com. 
 
CaseMap by CaseSoft 
CaseMap is a case analysis tool that makes it easy to organize, evaluate, and explore the facts, 
characters, and issues in a case. It is designed for use on all types of cases and by all types of 
litigators and investigators. CaseMap software integrates with numerous other litigation-support 
and electronic-discovery tools, including Adobe Acrobat, Applied Discovery, 
Binder, Concordance, JFS Litigator’s Notebook, KPMG’s Discovery Radar, LiveNote, and 
Sanction. 
 
Spreadsheets 
When a CaseMap file is created, the program auto matically sets up a series of spreadsheets 
used to organize critical case knowledge. These spreadsheets can be used to organize 
information about the facts, documents, characters, issues, and case law in every case.  
 
 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.634   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.635 
FACTS SPREADSHEET 
The facts spreadsheets include a case chronology in which the investigator can enter facts, 
dates, times, and the source of each piece of information. Investigators can also distinguish 
between disputed and undisputed facts and keep track of the status of each item. 
 
 
 
OBJECTS SPREADSHEET 
The objects spreadsheet allows investigators to organize the cast of characters—a list of the 
individuals and organizations involved in the case, and it should also catalog key documents 
and other important pieces of physical evidence.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.636   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
ISSUE SPREADSHEET 
The issue spreadsheet provides an outline of the issues, including both legal claims and 
critical factual disputes. The outline can be any number of levels deep.  
 
QUESTION SPREADSHEET 
Because many questions occur during the early stages of an investigation, the question 
spreadsheet allows users to filter and sort their open items using various criteria.  
 
RESEARCH SPREADSHEETS 
CaseMap has three research spreadsheets: Authorities, Extracts from Authorities and a 
combination of Authorities and Extracts. The research spreadsheets will organize and 
explore the user’s knowledge about the precedents and statutes relevant to their case, and it 
include links to actual case law using the authorities and extracts. The authorities spreadsheet 
can be used to manage top-level information about precedents, statutes, and other types of 
case research. The extracts spreadsheet can be used to capture details about particular 
sections of interest excerpted from important case law and statutes.  
 
Linking 
CaseMap also provides the ability to link pieces  of data in one spreadsheet with the source 
data or other relevant data in another sheet. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.637 
 
 
Filtering 
Once information is organized, CaseMap users can explore it. The most powerful case-exploration 
tool in CaseMap is the filtering function. A filter operation limits the rows that 
appear in a spreadsheet and on your printed report to those that meet criteria you specify.  
 
 
 
For more information, visit www.casesoft.com. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.638   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Actimize Enterprise Risk Case Manager 
Actimize Enterprise Risk Case Manager is case managements software that empowers 
companies to address enterprise-wide risk and compliance management. It is designed to 
help companies detect and react to fraud attacks more efficiently by consolidating all fraud 
and compliance issues into a central location. According to Actimize, the Risk Case Manager 
supports risk operations with workflow management, evidence collection, and 
documentation, and as a result, it allows users to: 
• Improve risk and compliance operations 
• Detect more issues; reduce risk, losses, and fines 
• Enable efficient and collaborative investigations 
• Reduce IT and operational costs 
 
Xanalys Suite 
Xanalys offers a suite of case management software applications to help users collect, 
manage, analyze, and share investigative intelligence. It offers three products: PowerCase, 
Link Explorer, and Indexer.  
 
PowerCase 
PowerCase provides an end-to-end platform for conducting large-scale investigations. It 
manages all aspects of an investigation team’s activities through the entire investigative 
process by providing the following functionality: 
• Provides centralized data storage 
• Establishes a document workflow to ensure that all evidence is examined a reviewed 
• Checks new case information against existing data for commonalities and associations 
• Assigns and tracks lines of investigation  
• Provides a range of search features 
• Allows users to visualize case data 
• Generates a complete audit trail of all user activity within the system 
 
Link Explorer 
Link Explorer allows users to construct database queries in natural, everyday language and 
displays the results in graphic form. Simply ask a question by dragging and dropping icons 
onto a query screen. Xanalys Link Explorer then  generates easy-to-read interactive charts 
that map how people, events, telephone calls, e-mail messages, and other case details are 
linked. As new information arrives, the displays are instantly updated. Information can be 
viewed in a variety of ways. In addition to powerful link analysis charts, Link Explorer can 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.639 
display results in numerous other formats, including a report, a timeline with events 
organized in a chronological order, or a hierarchy chart showing relationships among people. 
Link Explorer offers several methods to import,  enter, merge, or modify data, as well as to 
create new objects and links. These include a text importer, flexible data importer, data entry 
forms, QuickChart toolbox, and object cards.  
 
 
 
Indexer 
Indexer is a text extraction program that clearly and automatically reveals critical connections 
between information stored in a database. Indexer automatically extracts relevant 
information from unstructured text using entities (such as a person, company, or an event), 
attributes (such as occupation, sex, or company title), and relationships (such as located at, 
works for, and involved in event). Xanalys provides various ways to ensure that the 
information represented in the Index Plan is useful. These include loading them into a 
database for analysis by Link Explorer or other reporting or analysis tools, in addition to 
embedding the technology into third-party applications. With the key entities and 
relationships contained in a structured environment, it is now possible to access and query 
this information. Once a number of documents have been processed, a list of all the people 
mentioned in the documents or a list of companies, vehicles, or phone numbers associated 
with those listed people could be obtained. As new documents arrive, these can be 
incorporated and augment the existing results. The full power of Indexer capabilities can be 
embedded into a company’s own products and technologies. On the Windows platform, it 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.640   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
includes a COM interface to direct the information extraction output into any required form, 
such as input to some other process or to a database. 
 
For more information on Link Explorer or Indexer, visit www.xanalys.com.  
 
Enterprise Investigation Management 
Norkom Technologies’s Enterprise Investigation Management software is case management 
software for anti-money laundering and fraud investigations. It links information from 
multiple insider sources like foreign travel reporting databases and debriefings, employee 
security background information, network logs, and cyber activity logs to compose a picture 
of potential insider security threats. This composite approach puts otherwise disconnected 
pieces of information in context to help prevent sensitive information and capabilities from 
being compromised. For more information on Enterprise Investigation Management visit 
www.norkom.com. 
 
Multi-Channel Fraud 
Norkom Technology’s multi-channel fraud management solution provides an end-to-end 
fraud solution — from advanced detection to investigation, response, and recovery — and is 
built on Norkom’s unique, configurable financial crime and compliance platform, which 
enables users to customize the technology as their needs change and new fraud techniques 
emerge. Norkom’s sophisticated detection analytics are optimized to detect a wide range of 
fraud, including plastic fraud, applications fraud, check fraud, deposit fraud, sleeper fraud, 
electronic banking fraud, phishing, internal fraud, insurance fraud, account takeover, and 
identity theft. The solution provides fraud detection by uniting the analytical power of 
specialized techniques, including pre-defined fraud detection scenarios, in-depth behavioral 
and peer group profiling, unusualness analytics, predictive modeling, and network analytics. 
For more information on Multi-Channel Fraud visit www.norkom.com. 
 
i-Sight Case Management Software 
i-Sight Case Management Software is a type of case management software for investigations, 
complaints, corrective and preventive action management, and other business processes that 
require case management. It allows users to record investigation notes, create and assign 
tasks with due dates and reminders, send e-mails from within a case record, use template 
letters, record investigative findings, record investigative resolutions, create follow-up tasks, 
track time and costs, effectuate corrective actions, keep an audit trail, and attach documents.  
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.641 
EthicsPoint Issue and Event Manager 
EthicsPoint provides hotline and anti-fraud reporting and case management services. Its 
Issue and Event Manager helps businesses ma nage reported issues (e.g., HR management 
issues, work-related injuries, security investigations, conflict of interest, competitor 
misconduct, any code of conduct violation, etc.). EthicsPoint’s offers web report forms to 
help streamline issues documentation, providing management with a reporting mechanism 
that automatically integrates an entity’s re ported data within a centralized database.  
 
 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.701 



:


report and case manag softwar
there ar a number of program that can assist the fraud examin in manag the data and
inform gather these program can also be us to creat report graph and chart
of a particular case some of the most us of these program for fraud investig ar
discuss below
i2 analysi product line
i2 offer a line of analyt tool that allow user to search store visual and analyz data
some of those tool ar discuss below
analyst notebook
i2 inc offer a profession visual and analysi tool call analyst notebook
analyst notebook is a visual investig anali is softwar program that bring clariti to
complex investig and intellig analysi it enabl investig and analyst to turn
larg volum of dispar data into action intellig it creat chart and graph to
allow user to
visual larg volum of investig data to understand the big pictur
reveal pattern and hidden connect to help focu the investig
creat analyt chart manual or automat gener link and timelin chart from
structur data
commun complex case with intuit brief chart that captur and organ
support data
ibas
ibas is i2 investig databas that is it allow user to configur a data store captur
data and perform data analysi in a control environ
data miner
data miner is a data mine applic that can onli be instal with analyst
workstat it allow user to analyz larg amount of data and find ani pattern that mai
exist
analyst workstat
analyst workstat is an integr collect of analyt tool includ analyst
notebook ibas and data miner
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3633
for more inform on i2 product line visit wwwi2inccom
casemap by casesoft
casemap is a case analysi tool that make it easi to organ evalu and explor the fact
charact and issu in a case it is design for us on all type of case and by all type of
litig and investig casemap softwar integr with numer other litigationsupport
and electronicdiscoveri tool includ adob acrobat appli discoveri
binder concord jf litig notebook kpmg discoveri radar livenot and
sanction
spreadsheet
when a casemap file is creat the program auto matic set up a seri of spreadsheet
us to organ critic case knowledg these spreadsheet can be us to organ
inform about the fact document charact issu and case law in everi case
data analysi and report tool investig
3634 2011 fraud examin manual
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3635
fact spreadsheet
the fact spreadsheet includ a case chronolog in which the investig can enter fact
date time and the sourc of each piec of inform investig can also distinguish
between disput and undisput fact and keep track of the statu of each item
object spreadsheet
the object spreadsheet allow investig to organ the cast of charactersa list of the
individu and organ involv in the case and it should also catalog kei document
and other import piec of physic evid
data analysi and report tool investig
3636 2011 fraud examin manual
issu spreadsheet
the issu spreadsheet provid an outlin of the issu includ both legal claim and
critic factual disput the outlin can be ani number of level deep
question spreadsheet
becaus mani question occur dure the earli stage of an investig the question
spreadsheet allow user to filter and sort their open item us variou criteria
research spreadsheet
casemap ha three research spreadsheet author extract from author and a
combin of author and extract the research spreadsheet will organ and
explor the user knowledg about the preced and statut relev to their case and it
includ link to actual case law us the author and extract the author spreadsheet
can be us to manag toplevel inform about preced statut and other type of
case research the extract spreadsheet can be us to captur detail about particular
section of interest excerpt from import case law and statut
link
casemap also provid the abil to link piec of data in on spreadsheet with the sourc
data or other relev data in anoth sheet
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3637
filter
onc inform is organ casemap user can explor it the most power caseexplor
tool in casemap is the filter function a filter oper limit the row that
appear in a spreadsheet and on your print report to those that meet criteria you specifi
for more inform visit wwwcasesoftcom
data analysi and report tool investig
3638 2011 fraud examin manual
actim enterpris risk case manag
actim enterpris risk case manag is case manag softwar that empow
compani to address enterprisewid risk and complianc manag it is design to
help compani detect and react to fraud attack more effici by consolid all fraud
and complianc issu into a central locat accord to actim the risk case manag
support risk oper with workflow manag evid collect and
document and as a result it allow user to
improv risk and complianc oper
detect more issu reduc risk loss and fine
enabl effici and collabor investig
reduc it and oper cost
xanali suit
xanali offer a suit of case manag softwar applic to help user collect
manag analyz and share investig intellig it offer three product powercas
link explor and index
powercas
powercas provid an endtoend platform for conduct largescal investig it
manag all aspect of an investig team activ through the entir investig
process by provid the follow function
provid central data storag
establish a document workflow to ensur that all evid is examin a review
check new case inform against exist data for common and associ
assign and track line of investig
provid a rang of search featur
allow user to visual case data
gener a complet audit trail of all user activ within the system
link explor
link explor allow user to construct databas queri in natur everydai languag and
displai the result in graphic form simpli ask a question by drag and drop icon
onto a queri screen xanali link explor then gener easytoread interact chart
that map how peopl event telephon call email messag and other case detail ar
link as new inform arriv the displai ar instantli updat inform can be
view in a varieti of wai in addit to power link analysi chart link explor can
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3639
displai result in numer other format includ a report a timelin with event
organ in a chronolog order or a hierarchi chart show relationship among peopl
link explor offer sever method to import enter merg or modifi data as well as to
creat new object and link these includ a text import flexibl data import data entri
form quickchart toolbox and object card
index
index is a text extract program that clearli and automat reveal critic connect
between inform store in a databas index automat extract relev
inform from unstructur text us entiti such as a person compani or an event
attribut such as occup sex or compani titl and relationship such as locat at
work for and involv in event xanali provid variou wai to ensur that the
inform repres in the index plan is us these includ load them into a
databas for analysi by link explor or other report or analysi tool in addit to
embed the technolog into thirdparti applic with the kei entiti and
relationship contain in a structur environ it is now possibl to access and queri
thi inform onc a number of document have been process a list of all the peopl
mention in the document or a list of compani vehicl or phone number associ
with those list peopl could be obtain as new document arriv these can be
incorpor and augment the exist result the full power of index capabl can be
embed into a compani own product and technolog on the window platform it
data analysi and report tool investig
3640 2011 fraud examin manual
includ a com interfac to direct the inform extract output into ani requir form
such as input to some other process or to a databas
for more inform on link explor or index visit wwwxanalyscom
enterpris investig manag
norkom technologiess enterpris investig manag softwar is case manag
softwar for antimonei launder and fraud investig it link inform from
multipl insid sourc like foreign travel report databas and debrief employe
secur background inform network log and cyber activ log to compos a pictur
of potenti insid secur threat thi composit approach put otherwis disconnect
piec of inform in context to help prevent sensit inform and capabl from
be compromis for more inform on enterpris investig manag visit
wwwnorkomcom
multichannel fraud
norkom technolog multichannel fraud manag solut provid an endtoend
fraud solut from advanc detect to investig respons and recoveri and is
built on norkom uniqu configur financi crime and complianc platform which
enabl user to custom the technolog as their need chang and new fraud techniqu
emerg norkom sophist detect analyt ar optim to detect a wide rang of
fraud includ plastic fraud applic fraud check fraud deposit fraud sleeper fraud
electron bank fraud phish intern fraud insur fraud account takeov and
ident theft the solut provid fraud detect by unit the analyt power of
special techniqu includ predefin fraud detect scenario indepth behavior
and peer group profil unusu analyt predict model and network analyt
for more inform on multichannel fraud visit wwwnorkomcom
isight case manag softwar
isight case manag softwar is a type of case manag softwar for investig
complaint correct and prevent action manag and other busi process that
requir case manag it allow user to record investig note creat and assign
task with due date and remind send email from within a case record us templat
letter record investig find record investig resolut creat followup task
track time and cost effectu correct action keep an audit trail and attach document
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3641
ethicspoint issu and event manag
ethicspoint provid hotlin and antifraud report and case manag servic it
issu and event manag help busi ma nage report issu eg hr manag
issu workrel injuri secur investig conflict of interest competitor
misconduct ani code of conduct violat etc ethicspoint offer web report form to
help streamlin issu document provid manag with a report mechan
that automat integr an entiti re port data within a central databas
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3701
