2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/Legislation and Best Practices


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


Legislation and Best Practices 
An organization’s board of directors and senior management generally set the code of 
conduct for the company. This code of conduct is often referred to as the company’s “ethic” 
and is the standard by which all employees are expected to conduct themselves. If the 
company’s ethic is one of high integrity, it is anticipated that the employees will tend to be 
more honest. If, on the other hand, the ethic is one of corruption, the employees will view it 
as a license to be corrupt. “Ethical leadership has to come from inside, and from the top. 
Ethical considerations have got to be on senior management’s agenda. And they have to set 
the tone by example, not by sending memos,” says J. Gregory Dees, a professor at Harvard 
Business School. 
 
An unimpeachable company ethic does not, in and of itself, ensure that financial statement 
fraud will not occur. Other measures are required for management to discharge its 
responsibilities to prevent and detect fraudulent financial reporting. 
 



:


legisl and best practic
an organ board of director and senior manag gener set the code of
conduct for the compani thi code of conduct is often refer to as the compani ethic
and is the standard by which all employe ar expect to conduct themselv if the
compani ethic is on of high integr it is anticip that the employe will tend to be
more honest if on the other hand the ethic is on of corrupt the employe will view it
as a licens to be corrupt ethic leadership ha to come from insid and from the top
ethic consider have got to be on senior manag agenda and thei have to set
the tone by exampl not by send memo sai j gregori dee a professor at harvard
busi school
an unimpeach compani ethic doe not in and of itself ensur that financi statement
fraud will not occur other measur ar requir for manag to discharg it
respons to prevent and detect fraudul financi report
