2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/Management/What Documents Should Be Kept?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


What Documents Should Be Kept?   
One of the first steps in establishing a document retention policy is to identify the types of 
documents that need to be retained or destroyed. It is important to remember that every 
organization is different; thus, an organization may require the retention of documents that 
are not provided for in this text. All types of documents produced by an organization must 
be initially accounted for. This includes tangible and electronic documents, and is never 
limited to financial documents. Accounting records, corporate tax records, bank records, 
employment records, various workplace records (including in-house e-mails and client 
correspondence), and legal records must be considered when constructing a DRP for a 
particular organization.  
 
A sample document retention policy that contains a list of records to be taken into account 
when determining retention protocol is included at the end of this chapter. A company 
should check with its local counsel regarding specific state statutes requiring different 
periods. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.221 
Other factors to consider in identifying documents include member/constituent 
expectations, IRS regulations, business taxable income regulations, standards under 
Sarbanes-Oxley, and internal factors (e.g., changes in Board of Directors, Board resolutions, 
patents, and copyrights). 
 
Records typically generated by a company that reflect or materially relate to professional 
services must also be identified in the DRP. For example, accounting and auditing firms 
should mention the retention and destruction of documents that make up client files, such as 
client billing and payment records, correspondence, and time records. 
 



:


what document should be kept
on of the first step in establish a document retent polici is to identifi the type of
document that need to be retain or destroi it is import to rememb that everi
organ is differ thu an organ mai requir the retent of document that
ar not provid for in thi text all type of document produc by an organ must
be initi account for thi includ tangibl and electron document and is never
limit to financi document account record corpor tax record bank record
employ record variou workplac record includ inhous email and client
correspond and legal record must be consid when construct a drp for a
particular organ
a sampl document retent polici that contain a list of record to be taken into account
when determin retent protocol is includ at the end of thi chapter a compani
should check with it local counsel regard specif state statut requir differ
period
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1221
other factor to consid in identifi document includ memberconstitu
expect ir regul busi taxabl incom regul standard under
sarbanesoxlei and intern factor eg chang in board of director board resolut
patent and copyright
record typic gener by a compani that reflect or materi relat to profession
servic must also be identifi in the drp for exampl account and audit firm
should mention the retent and destruct of document that make up client file such as
client bill and payment record correspond and time record
