2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/External Auditors/PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5—An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting that Is Integrated with an Audit of Financial Statements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5—An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting that Is Integrated with an Audit of Financial Statements  
In May 2007, the PCAOB adopted Auditing Standard No. 5, An Audit of Internal Control Over 
Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With An Audit of Financial Statements, as a replacement to 
Auditing Standard No. 2, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Performed in 
Conjunction With an Audit of Financial Statements,  the previous standard governing audits of 
internal control over financial reporting (ICO FR) as mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
The auditing standard was intended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of internal 
control audits, while also reducing unnecessary costs, especially for smaller public 
companies. Auditing Standard No. 5 supersedes Auditing Standard No. 2 for all audits of 
ICOFR for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2007.  
 
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that management must assess and report 
on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR,  and the external auditor must attest to 
management’s internal control assessment. Auditing Standard No. 5 lays out the 
requirements and provides guidance for auditors who are engaged to perform an audit of 
management’s assessment of the internal controls that is integrated with an audit of the 
financial statements.  
 
Following is a descriptive summary of some of the requirements laid out in the standard. 
Practitioners in this area should review Auditing Standard No. 5 in its entirety for more 
detailed information. A copy of the entire standard can be obtained from the PCAOB 
(www.pcaobus.org). 
 



:


pcaob audit standard no 5an audit of intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement
in mai 2007 the pcaob adopt audit standard no 5 an audit of intern control over
financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement as a replac to
audit standard no 2 an audit of intern control over financi report perform in
conjunct with an audit of financi statement the previou standard govern audit of
intern control over financi report ico fr as mandat by the sarbanesoxlei act
the audit standard wa intend to improv the effici and effect of intern
control audit while also reduc unnecessari cost especi for smaller public
compani audit standard no 5 supersed audit standard no 2 for all audit of
icofr for fiscal year end on or after novemb 15 2007
section 404 of the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that manag must assess and report
on the effect of the compani icofr and the extern auditor must attest to
manag intern control assess audit standard no 5 lai out the
requir and provid guidanc for auditor who ar engag to perform an audit of
manag assess of the intern control that is integr with an audit of the
financi statement
follow is a descript summari of some of the requir laid out in the standard
practition in thi area should review audit standard no 5 in it entireti for more
detail inform a copi of the entir standard can be obtain from the pcaob
wwwpcaobusorg
