2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Signs of Counterfeit and Forged Checks


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Signs of Counterfeit and Forged Checks 
A counterfeiter will go to great lengths to make his check appear to be the genuine article. 
However, there are a few giveaways that a check is counterfeit. If the printing on the check 
does not seem uniform in texture and color, or slants up or down, the check is not good. 
Also, the transit number in the top right corner must match the electronically encoded 
number at the bottom of the check. These numbers normally do not coincide on altered 
checks. The first three of the electronically encoded numbers indicate the state and district 
office of the issuer. Again, on forged checks, these numbers do not always match properly. 
The check number itself should be found in the encoded serial number at the bottom.  
 
Knowing that many merchants regard checks with low check numbers as suspect, forgers 
often attempt to add a digit. Here again, they may have difficulty matching the ink used to 
produce the check. A simple and effective method of detecting bad checks is to fan a group 
of checks. Counterfeit checks will sometimes stand out as a slightly different color. 
 



:


sign of counterfeit and forg check
a counterfeit will go to great length to make hi check appear to be the genuin articl
howev there ar a few giveawai that a check is counterfeit if the print on the check
doe not seem uniform in textur and color or slant up or down the check is not good
also the transit number in the top right corner must match the electron encod
number at the bottom of the check these number normal do not coincid on alter
check the first three of the electron encod number indic the state and district
offic of the issuer again on forg check these number do not alwai match properli
the check number itself should be found in the encod serial number at the bottom
know that mani merchant regard check with low check number as suspect forger
often attempt to add a digit here again thei mai have difficulti match the ink us to
produc the check a simpl and effect method of detect bad check is to fan a group
of check counterfeit check will sometim stand out as a slightli differ color
