2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud/Telephone/Mail Order Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Telephone/Mail Order Fraud 
The fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize, with the only catch being that the 
winner must have a credit card. Once the thief has the number, he can order merchandise or 
have money wired to himself. 
 
A great deal of credit card fraud is childishly simple to complete. Many crooks have great 
success by simply selecting a name from the phone book, calling, and pretending to be a 
Visa/MasterCard representative. The victim is told that his card number may have been 
obtained and used illegally by criminals. Or, a representative of a travel agency may call, 
claiming the victim has won a discount travel package. In any case, the victim is asked to 
read the card number off for verification or inclusion in the discount deal. A surprisingly 
large amount of people fall for this scheme and give out their credit card information. 
Purchases through catalogues and mail order are then made using the victim’s card number. 
They may select an unoccupied address to which their merchandise can be delivered, 
perhaps leaving a note asking the delivery service to simply put the package by the  
back door. 
 



:


telephonemail order fraud
the fraudster might offer a free trip or other nice prize with the onli catch be that the
winner must have a credit card onc the thief ha the number he can order merchandis or
have monei wire to himself
a great deal of credit card fraud is childishli simpl to complet mani crook have great
success by simpli select a name from the phone book call and pretend to be a
visamastercard repres the victim is told that hi card number mai have been
obtain and us illeg by crimin or a repres of a travel agenc mai call
claim the victim ha won a discount travel packag in ani case the victim is ask to
read the card number off for verif or inclus in the discount deal a surprisingli
larg amount of peopl fall for thi scheme and give out their credit card inform
purchas through catalogu and mail order ar then made us the victim card number
thei mai select an unoccupi address to which their merchandis can be deliv
perhap leav a note ask the deliveri servic to simpli put the packag by the
back door
