2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Physical Security Features/VISA CARD FEATURES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


VISA CARD FEATURES 
• The Visa logo should have micro-printing around the border. The fine print is barely 
readable without magnification. 
• The flying dove hologram should appear to be three-dimensional and appear to move 
when the card is tilted back and forth. 
• Visa’s embossed account numbers begin with a 4 and contain 16 digits. All digits must 
be clean, even and the same size and shape. If a card has been re-embossed, the numbers 
may appear to be fuzzy. As a general rule of thumb always check the hologram. It is 
easier to spot a re-embossed number there. 
• A flying “V” is an embossed security character  beside the “Good Thru” date. If the “V” 
is not italicized or it is missing, the card is counterfeit. However, this is not a required 
security feature and may or may not be present on the card. 
• If there are “ghost images” of the numbers behind the embossing on either the front or 
back of the card, it has been re-embossed. If the card has been re-embossed the 
hologram might be damaged. 
• A four-digit number must be printed below the embossed account number. This four-
 digit number must match exactly with the first four digits of the account number. Both 
must begin with 4. 
• The Visa brand mark appears in blue and gold on a white background. It must appear in 
either the bottom right, top left, or top right corner. 
• An ultraviolet sensitive dove is visible on the face of the card when the card is placed 
under an ultraviolet light. 
• If someone has tried to erase the signature panel, the word “VOID” will be displayed. 
• Card Verification Value 2 (CVV2) is a three-digit code that appears on the back of the 
card in the signature panel. Typically the signature panel will have a series of numbers 
but only the last three digits make up the CVV2 code. CVV2 is used primarily in card-
 not-present transactions to verify that the customer is in possession of a valid Visa card 
at the time of the sale. Merchants will request the CVV2 from the cardholder at 
checkout, and the information is sent electronically to the card-issuing bank to verify its 
validity. Within seconds the CVV2 results are returned with authorization. If it’s returned 
as invalid, merchants have the right to stop the transaction. For added protection, 
merchants are prohibited from keeping or storing the CVV2 number after the 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1029 
transaction has been completed.  
• Check the valid dates for evidence of tampering. Do not accept an expired card. 
 
For more information about Visa’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.visa.ca/en/merchant/fraudprevention/cardfeatures.cfm.  
 



:


visa card featur
the visa logo should have microprint around the border the fine print is bare
readabl without magnif
the fly dove hologram should appear to be threedimension and appear to move
when the card is tilt back and forth
visa emboss account number begin with a 4 and contain 16 digit all digit must
be clean even and the same size and shape if a card ha been reemboss the number
mai appear to be fuzzi as a gener rule of thumb alwai check the hologram it is
easier to spot a reemboss number there
a fly v is an emboss secur charact besid the good thru date if the v
is not italic or it is miss the card is counterfeit howev thi is not a requir
secur featur and mai or mai not be present on the card
if there ar ghost imag of the number behind the emboss on either the front or
back of the card it ha been reemboss if the card ha been reemboss the
hologram might be damag
a fourdigit number must be print below the emboss account number thi four
digit number must match exactli with the first four digit of the account number both
must begin with 4
the visa brand mark appear in blue and gold on a white background it must appear in
either the bottom right top left or top right corner
an ultraviolet sensit dove is visibl on the face of the card when the card is place
under an ultraviolet light
if someon ha tri to eras the signatur panel the word void will be displai
card verif valu 2 cvv2 is a threedigit code that appear on the back of the
card in the signatur panel typic the signatur panel will have a seri of number
but onli the last three digit make up the cvv2 code cvv2 is us primarili in card
notpres transact to verifi that the custom is in possess of a valid visa card
at the time of the sale merchant will request the cvv2 from the cardhold at
checkout and the inform is sent electron to the cardissu bank to verifi it
valid within second the cvv2 result ar return with author if it return
as invalid merchant have the right to stop the transact for ad protect
merchant ar prohibit from keep or store the cvv2 number after the
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11029
transact ha been complet
check the valid date for evid of tamper do not accept an expir card
for more inform about visa secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwvisacaenmerchantfraudpreventioncardfeaturescfm
