2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Physical Security Features/AMERICAN EXPRESS FEATURES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


AMERICAN EXPRESS FEATURES 
• Ultraviolet inks are used such that when a genuine card is examined with a black light, 
the letters AMEX, as well as phosphorescence in the portrait of the Centurion are 
visible.  
• The portrait of the Centurion is printed with a high degree of clarity and detail such as 
the portraits on U.S. currency. 
• Erasure or tampering with the signature panel will cause the waved print background to 
appear white or smudged. 
• The card member account number is 15 digits beginning with 37. The embossing should 
be clear and uniform in size and spacing. 
• A duplicate account number is on the reverse of the card to ensure the card number 
appearing on the front of the card has not been altered. 
• The pre-printed (non-embossed) Card Identification Number (CID), which is a four-
 digit number printed on the front of the card that is used to ensure that the individual 
using the card is actually the owner of the card, should always appear above  the account 
number, on either the right or the left edge of the card. 
• The card number or cardmember name should be printed in the same typeface as the 
American Express typeface.  
• All American Express cards, including Network, Optima and Corporate, will bear the 
same security features outlined here. 
 
For more information on American Express’s security features, visit their website at: 
https://www209.americanexpress.com/merchant/singlevoice/USEng/FrontServlet?request
 _type=n avigate&page=cardSecurityFeatures.  
 



:


american express featur
ultraviolet ink ar us such that when a genuin card is examin with a black light
the letter amex as well as phosphoresc in the portrait of the centurion ar
visibl
the portrait of the centurion is print with a high degre of clariti and detail such as
the portrait on us currenc
erasur or tamper with the signatur panel will caus the wave print background to
appear white or smudg
the card member account number is 15 digit begin with 37 the emboss should
be clear and uniform in size and space
a duplic account number is on the revers of the card to ensur the card number
appear on the front of the card ha not been alter
the preprint nonemboss card identif number cid which is a four
digit number print on the front of the card that is us to ensur that the individu
us the card is actual the owner of the card should alwai appear abov the account
number on either the right or the left edg of the card
the card number or cardmemb name should be print in the same typefac as the
american express typefac
all american express card includ network optima and corpor will bear the
same secur featur outlin here
for more inform on american expresss secur featur visit their websit at
httpswww209americanexpresscommerchantsinglevoiceusengfrontservletrequest
typen avigatepagecardsecurityfeatur
