2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Internet/Telephone Orders


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Internet/Telephone Orders 
With these transactions, vendors never have the opportunity to see the customer’s credit 
card. The only fail-safe, self-protective measure open to them is to postpone delivery until 
the transaction has cleared the customer’s account. In our next-day-delivery society, 
however, this is may be detrimental to business for some vendors. There are a couple of 
other options open to merchants: 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1033 
• Beware of orders with different “bill to” and “ship to” addresses unless the item is 
intended as a gift.  
• Setting up free e-mail accounts with companies like Hotmail or Yahoo is very simple and 
allows the user anonymity. Orders received from free e-mail accounts should be treated 
with extra scrutiny.  
 
Potential signs of card-not-present fraud: 
• First-time shopper — Criminals are always looking for new victims. 
• Larger-than-normal orders — Because stolen cards or account numbers have a limited life 
span, crooks need to maximize the size of their purchase. 
• Orders that include several of the same item—Having multiples of the same item 
increases a criminal’s profits. 
• Orders made up of big-ticket item — These items have maximum resale value and 
therefore maximum profit potential. 
• “Rush” or “overnight” shipping — Fraudsters want these fraudulently obtained items as 
soon as possible for the quickest possible resale, and aren’t concerned about extra 
delivery charges. 
• Shipping to an international address — A significant number of fraudulent transactions 
are shipped to fraudulent cardholders outside of the U.S. 
• Transactions with similar account numbers — Particularly useful if the account numbers 
used have been generated using software available on the Internet (such as 
CreditMaster). 
• Shipping to a single address, but transactions placed on multiple cards—Could involve 
an account number generated using special software or the use of several of stolen cards. 
• Multiple transactions on one card over a very short period of time—Could be an attempt 
to “run a card” until the account is closed. 
• Multiple transactions on one card or a similar card with a single IP (Internet Protocol) 
address — More than one or two cards could indicate a fraud scheme. 
• Orders from Internet addresses that make  use of free e-mail services—These e-mail 
services involve no billing relationships, and therefore provide neither an audit trail nor 
verification that a legitimate cardholder has opened the account. 
 



:


internettelephon order
with these transact vendor never have the opportun to see the custom credit
card the onli failsaf selfprotect measur open to them is to postpon deliveri until
the transact ha clear the custom account in our nextdaydeliveri societi
howev thi is mai be detriment to busi for some vendor there ar a coupl of
other option open to merchant
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11033
bewar of order with differ bill to and ship to address unless the item is
intend as a gift
set up free email account with compani like hotmail or yahoo is veri simpl and
allow the user anonym order receiv from free email account should be treat
with extra scrutini
potenti sign of cardnotpres fraud
firsttim shopper crimin ar alwai look for new victim
largerthannorm order becaus stolen card or account number have a limit life
span crook need to maxim the size of their purchas
order that includ sever of the same itemhav multipl of the same item
increas a crimin profit
order made up of bigticket item these item have maximum resal valu and
therefor maximum profit potenti
rush or overnight ship fraudster want these fraudul obtain item as
soon as possibl for the quickest possibl resal and arent concern about extra
deliveri charg
ship to an intern address a signific number of fraudul transact
ar ship to fraudul cardhold outsid of the us
transact with similar account number particularli us if the account number
us have been gener us softwar avail on the internet such as
creditmast
ship to a singl address but transact place on multipl cardscould involv
an account number gener us special softwar or the us of sever of stolen card
multipl transact on on card over a veri short period of timecould be an attempt
to run a card until the account is close
multipl transact on on card or a similar card with a singl ip internet protocol
address more than on or two card could indic a fraud scheme
order from internet address that make us of free email servicesthes email
servic involv no bill relationship and therefor provid neither an audit trail nor
verif that a legitim cardhold ha open the account
