2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


ANALYZING DOCUMENTS 
 
The fraud examiner will usually obtain a great deal of documentary evidence. It is critical that 
the examiner understand the relevance of this evidence and how it should be preserved and 
presented. Always keep in mind that documents can either help or hurt a case, depending on 
which ones are presented and how they are presented. The goal is to make certain that all 
relevant documents are included, and all irrelevant documents are eliminated. Many 
examiners pay too much attention to documents. It is easy to get bogged down in detail 
when examining records and to lose sight of a simple fact: documents do not make cases; 
witnesses make cases. The documents make or break the witness. So-called paper cases often 
confuse and bore a jury. 
 
Basic procedures in handling evidence are required for it to be accepted by the court.  
Proof must be provided that the evidence is relevant and material. Evidence submitted  
must be properly identified, and it must be established that the proper chain of custody  
was maintained. 
 
The relevance of documents cannot be easily determined early in a case. For that reason, all 
possible relevant documents should be obtained. If they are not needed, they can always be 
returned. Here are a few general rules regarding the collection of documents: 
• Obtain original documents where feasible. Make working copies for review, and keep the 
originals segregated. 
• Do not touch originals any more than necessary; they might later have to undergo 
forensic analysis. 
• Maintain a good filing system for the documents. This is especially critical when large 
numbers of documents are obtained. Losing a key document is an unpardonable sin, and 
can mortally damage the case. Documents can be stamped sequentially for easy 
reference. 
 
 
Obtaining Documentary Evidence 
Documentary evidence may be obtained in a number of ways. If both parties agree, it is 
possible to obtain evidence by consent. This is the preferred method. Consent can be oral or 
written. When information is obtained from possible adverse witnesses, or the target of the 
examination, it is recommended that the consent be in writing. Sample forms are contained 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in the Appendix to the “Report Writing” chapter. In many cases, however, the investigator 
will not wish to alert the suspect to his intentions and other routes must be taken.  
 
If the evidence is owned by and in the control of the party that requests the information 
(e.g., in an employee’s desk drawers at the office), then the investigator is usually able to 
obtain the documents as required.  
 
If, however, evidence is held by other parties or in uncontrolled locations, specific legal 
action is required. Most often, the legal process used takes the form of a subpoena or other 
court order to produce the documents and records (including electronic records). Other 
forms of court orders can be used to obtain witness evidence and statements.  
  
Under no circumstances should the investigator attempt to obtain documents by other 
means, as this can lead to charges of theft, trespass, and other sanctions. Further details are 
provided in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
Types of Evidence 
There are two basic types of admissible evidence: direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence  
shows prima facie the facts at issue; it proves the fact directly. What constitutes direct 
evidence depends on the factors involved. For example, in the Linda Reed Collins case 
involving possible kickbacks, which is included in the Appendix to this section, direct 
evidence might be a check from the vendor to her. 
 
Circumstantial evidence  is that which indirectly shows culpability. In the case of a kickback 
allegation against Collins, cash deposits of unknown origin deposited to her account around 
the time of the suspect transaction could be considered circumstantial evidence.  
 
Organization of Evidence 
Keeping track of the amount of paper generated is one of the biggest problems in fraud 
cases. It is essential that documents obtained be properly organized early on in an 
examination, and that they be continuously reorganized as the case progresses. Remember, it 
is usually difficult to ascertain the relevance of the evidence early in the case. Good 
organization in complex cases includes the following: 
• Segregating documents by either witness or transaction. In the first method, the 
examiner takes the list of names, whether employee, associate, or witness, and begins 
assembling collected documents by witness. Alternatively, the fraud examiner might find 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.103 
it easier to organize the information by grouping evidence of the same or similar 
transactions together. Chronological organization, however, is the least preferred 
method. 
• Making a key document file — a separate file that contains copies of certain important pieces 
of information for quick access — for easy access to the most relevant documents. 
Periodically review the key documents. Move the less important documents to backup 
files and keep only the most relevant documents in the main file. 
• Establish a database early if there is a large amount of information to process. This 
database can be manual or computerized and accessed by keywords or Bates Stamp 
numbering. The database should include, at a minimum, the date of the document, the 
individual from whom the document was obtained, the date obtained, a brief 
description, and the subject to whom the document pertains. 
 
Chronologies 
A chronology of events should be commenced early in the case. The purpose of maintaining 
a chronology is to establish the chain of events leading to the proof. The chronology might 
or might not be made a part of the formal report; at a minimum, it can be used for analysis 
of the case and placed in a working paper binder. Keep the chronology brief and include 
only information necessary to prove the case. By making the chronology too detailed, you 
defeat its purpose. The chronology should be revised as necessary, adding new information 
and deleting  
the irrelevant. 
 
To-Do Lists 
Another indispensable aid is the to-do list. The list, which must be updated frequently, 
should be kept in a stenographer’s pad or other permanent ring binder to allow a cumulative 
record. In a very complex case, the list can be broken into long- and short-term objectives: 
that which must be done eventually (e.g., prove elements of a particular count), and that 
which should be done tomorrow (e.g., conduct an interview or draft a subpoena). However 
organized, some sort of list must be kept, otherwise important points will be forgotten in the 
lengthy case. A sample checklist is included in the “Report Writing” chapter. 
 
 
Examining Fraudulent Documents 
Forged, altered, fabricated, and other suspicious documents are regularly encountered in 
fraud cases. Most business, legal issues, or financial transactions will produce a substantial 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
amount of paper, including contracts, agreements, wills, order forms, invoices, and 
statements. These documents can be evidence in establishing that a fraud was committed, in 
determining the nature and scope of the fraud, and in identifying the parties responsible. 
  
The fraud examiner is not expected to be a document expert. He should, however, be aware 
of ways to spot phony documents and have knowledge of the capabilities and limitations of 
forensic examinations. In addition, if the fraud examiner suspects that significant documents 
are phony, he should consider consulting with an expert. Expert forensic examinations 
conducted as a part of a fraud investigation can contribute to its success in several ways: 
• Expert examination results can assist in developing and proving the fraud theory: who 
did what and when they did it. 
• Expert examination results can corroborate or refute statements by witnesses or fraud 
suspects. 
• Having the results of expert examinations before interviews can provide significant 
leverage for the examiner during his interviews with fraud suspects, even resulting in 
admissions of guilt from suspects who are confronted with the factual evidence. 
• Forensic handwriting examinations and comparisons can result in the positive 
identification of the writer or signer of a document. Since writing is a conscious act, the 
identification might serve to prove that a particular act is intentional or willful. Proof of 
intent is usually necessary to prosecute a wrongdoer successfully. 
 
 
Early Consultation with an Expert Can Prove Valuable 
An expert’s assistance can be of value early in an investigation, not just in preparation for a 
trial. Fraud examiners should consider consulting with experts early in their investigation or 
inquiry if they suspect that significant documents are phony or have been forged, altered, or 
otherwise manipulated. Many times the scope of an investigation can be narrowed or 
directed by eliminating multiple suspects through handwriting examinations. The expert’s 
findings might solidify the fraud examiner’s theories of how the fraud was committed, or 
they can prevent wasted effort by proving theories incorrect at an earlier stage. See the end 
of this section for more information about finding help in document examinations. 
 
 
Types of Forensic Document Examinations 
There are many different types of forensic document examinations. However, most 
examinations (more than 95 percent of all U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation Laboratory 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.105 
document examinations, for example) concern signatures, handwriting, hand printing, or 
documents created by a typewriter or word processor. Additionally, issues concerning 
photocopies and determining when a document was prepared frequently arise. Fraud 
examiners should be aware that many different types of forensic examinations are possible, 
but that the following forensic examinations could be of particular value when a fraud 
involves documents: 
• Detection of forged signatures 
• Identification of the writers of signatures, handwriting, and hand printing 
• Detecting altered documents 
• Detecting and restoring erasures and eradications 
• Determining when a document was or was not prepared 
• Detecting counterfeited documents and examining printed documents 
• Detecting and restoring faint indented writings 
• Comparisons of paper and inks 
• Determining whether two sheets of paper came from the same tablet or pad of paper 
• Examinations of paper folds and sequence of folds 
• Comparisons of torn or cut paper edges 
• Restoration of charred and partially burned documents 
• Identifying the machine that made a photocopy and whether two copies were made on 
the same machine 
• Examinations of facsimile (fax) copies 
• Identifying the source of, or alterations to, notary seals, wax seals, and cachets 
• Detecting the opening and resealing of sealed documents and examining adhesives 
• Detecting inserted text in typewritten, printed, or handwritten documents 
• Determining the sequence of handwritten text, signatures, and typewriting 
• Identifying rubber stamp impressions 
• Identifying mechanical check-writer and numbering-device impressions 
 
 
Handling Documents as Physical Evidence 
A document can be a piece of physical evidence and not just a source of information. As a 
piece of evidence it should be handled carefully and stored properly in a sealed, initialed, and 
dated paper folder or envelope to avoid damage or contamination. If necessary, make a 
working copy and preserve the original document for submission to a forensic document 
examiner. Most forensic examinations will require the original document, not a copy of it, 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
since most photocopies do not reproduce original writings, typewriting, or other features 
with sufficient clarity or detail to allow adequate examination. 
 
When initialing a document for future identification, do it in a non-critical area and use a 
different type of writing instrument than was used for the questioned writings on the 
document. The examiner should never write or make markings on the original document 
other than his unobtrusive initials for identification. Do not add new folds, staple it, place 
paper clips on it, crumple it, or do anything else that would affect or change its original 
condition. If stored in an envelope, be careful not to write on the envelope and cause 
indentations on the original document inside. Photocopies and laser-printed documents 
should always be stored in paper folders or envelopes, not transparent plastic envelopes, 
which can result in the copies sticking to the plastic and destroying some features of the 
document. 
 
Chain of Custody 
From the moment evidence is received, its chain of custody  must be maintained for it to be 
accepted by the court. This means that a record must be made when the item is received or 
when it leaves the care, custody, or control of the fraud examiner. This is best handled by a 
memorandum of interview with the custodian of the records when the evidence is received. 
The memorandum should state: 
• What items were received 
• When they were received 
• From whom they were received 
• Where they are maintained 
 
If the item is later turned over to someone else, a record of this should be made—preferably 
in memorandum form. All evidence received should be uniquely marked so that it can be 
identified later. The preferable way is to initial and date the item; however, this can pose 
problems in the case of original business records furnished voluntarily. For them, a small tick 
mark or other nondescript identifier can be used. If it is not practical to mark the original 
document, it should be placed in a sealed envelope, which should then be initialed and dated. 
 
Preserving for Fingerprint Examinations 
If fingerprint examinations are anticipated, use gloves to handle the documents (be careful if 
tweezers are used because they can leave indentations that might obscure faint indented 
writings or the identifiable indentations that are sometimes left by photocopy and fax 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.107 
machines). If you or other known people have inadvertently handled the documents with 
bare hands, your names should be provided to the fingerprint specialist. It might be 
necessary to provide the expert with sets of inked fingerprints of these people for 
elimination purposes. (See the “Fingerprints” section for additional information.) 
 
Charred or Partially Burned Documents 
These documents might contain valuable evidence if restored by experts, but they are very 
fragile and should be handled with extreme care. For proper preservation and storage, 
trained experts might use special polyester film sheets and envelopes, which are not readily 
available to the fraud examiner. The examiner can best preserve such evidence for 
submission to the forensic expert by using a sturdy crush-proof container into which he 
places layers of cotton (available in rolls at fabric and sewing materials shops). Carefully slide 
a sheet of paper or thin cardboard under the burned fragments, lift them and place them on 
the layers of cotton, then remove the paper used for lifting. Gently place additional layers of 
cotton over the fragments until the container is filled. Do not compress the cotton. Seal the 
container, initial and date it, add an identifying contents label or exhibit number, and clearly 
write or stamp “Fragile” on the container. 
 
Recognizing Phony Documents 
Forensic document examiners apply scientific methods and use a variety of technical 
instruments in conducting examinations and comparisons of documents. Individual minute 
characteristics in handwriting and typewriting are examined and compared with genuine 
comparison standards. Detailed analyses are made of document features for proof of 
changes or modifications. Instruments used include sensitive measuring devices, low-power 
magnifying glasses, several types of microscopes, ultraviolet and infrared lighting, optical 
filters, micro and macro photography, computerized image-enhancement systems, sensitive 
instruments to detect faint indented writings, and numerous others. Various chemical 
analyses are also conducted. 
 
Although not expected to be a documents expert, an observant fraud examiner might be 
able to recognize some features of documents that could alert him to their fraudulent nature: 
• Signature forgeries  might be recognized by irregularities noticeable in the written letters 
and/or by their differences in size from a genuine signature. A side-by-side comparison 
with a genuine signature might reveal the differences. However, remember that advanced 
age, poor health, temporary injury, and the use of drugs and alcohol can result in similar 
discrepancies and might mislead the examiner. Genuine comparison samples should be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtained, and a forensic document examiner consulted to make an expert determination. 
(See the “How to Obtain Handwriting Samples” section.) 
• Substituted pages  in multiple-page documents, such as contracts and wills, can often be 
spotted by holding each page in front of a bright light. Differences in the whiteness, 
density, thickness, opacity, and paper-fiber patterns of the substituted sheets might be 
apparent. 
• Some ink differences, alterations, erasures, and obliterations are also revealed by holding the 
paper in front of a bright light or holding a light over the writings at different angles and 
observing differences in the color and reflectivity of the inks or disturbances to the paper 
surface. 
• Counterfeited printed documents, such as checks, stock and bond certificates, business forms 
and stationery, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and other identification documents, are 
sometimes readily disclosed by side-by-side comparisons with corresponding genuine 
documents. Be alert for the use of incorrect or different versions or form revisions of 
the documents. For forensic examinations, it will be necessary to obtain and furnish 
genuine comparison samples of the printed documents to the document examiner. (See 
the “Counterfeit Printed Documents” section.) 
• Suspicious indented writings might be revealed by reducing the light in the room and holding 
a bright beam of light (a narrow-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp will do the 
job) low and parallel to the page surface. (See the “Indented Writings” section.) 
 
 
Identifying Writings 
The development of a person’s handwriting usually begins at an early age as part of his 
formal education. So-called copy-book styles are taught, and the students are instructed 
through exercises to emulate as nearly as possible those letter formations. However, from 
the very beginning, the students’ writing skills vary considerably due to their differing 
physical and mental capabilities. These differences between individuals increase with age; 
physical development; and the acquisition of skills, differing aesthetic values, differences in 
education, and differences in the personal and professional usage of writing. As a result, each 
person’s writings contain a unique and identifiable combination of acquired individual 
personal characteristics and shared “class” characteristics. Forensic document examiners are 
trained and experienced in examining and comparing writings and assessing this combination 
of individual and class characteristics in making expert determinations of identity or  
non-identity. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.109 
Class Characteristics 
Fraud examiners should not be misled in developing suspects by mistaking similar class 
characteristics in different writing samples. Samples that seem to look alike are not necessarily 
from the same individual. The writings of some people might share superficial similarities in 
appearance and style and look the same to the layman when, in fact, they are very different. 
Forensic document examiners can correct this mistake. 
 
Copy-Book Styles  
Some of a writer’s letter shapes, handwritings tyle, and other characteristics might be shared 
by other writers because they were taught the same original copy-book system. In the United 
States, different states and different school districts within the states teach several different 
copy-book systems. Internationally, different systems are also taught. Writers might retain 
remnants of the system they learned as children. As an example, second-language writings of 
people taught in a Cyrillic (Russian) alphabet style will be influenced by Cyrillic letter styles 
and might contain some similarities. As another example, the hand printing and numeral 
styles taught to draftsmen, architects, and engineers might result in apparent similarities in 
the hand printing of people trained in those professions. 
 
“Copycat” Styles  
Some writers, especially adolescents, the young, and the easily influenced, might adopt the 
general handwriting style or some individual letter designs of a respected teacher or parent, 
or one shared by their peers. An example is the exaggerated rounded letter forms and 
circular “i” dots and periods that form the so-called bubble writings of some adolescent 
females. This style is usually abandoned as the person matures.  
 
Natural Variations, Disguise, Distortions, and Forgeries 
Variations  
No one signs his signature or writes exactly the same way twice because writing is a human 
act of coordinated mental and muscular activity, not the precise, repetitive action of a 
machine. However, each writer has his own fairly specific range of natural variation. Several 
examples of writing are necessary for a forensic document examiner to establish if a 
questioned writing is, or is not, within the range of natural variation of a particular writer. If 
fraud examiners find two signatures that are exactly alike, then at least one is a forgery, 
probably a tracing.  
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Disguise  
Disguise is the conscious, intentional effort by a person to change or conceal his normal 
writings. Disguise is attempted in an effort to prepare writings that can later be disclaimed or 
that the writer hopes will be anonymous and cannot be traced to the source. The success of 
an attempt to disguise writings depends on the writer’s skill and knowledge of writings. Most 
attempts at disguise involve one or more of the following: change in slant, change in size, 
change in shapes of capital (upper-case) letters, changes in the shapes and sizes of loops in 
letters that contain them, use of bizarre letter designs, or block (squared) hand printing. Only 
rarely is the opposite, non-writing hand used. Fraud examiners should be aware that it is 
possible to successfully disguise writings to the point that they cannot be positively 
identified, even by experts.  This is especially true when only limited amounts of writings  
are involved. 
 
Distortions  
Distortions are unintentional changes to a person’s writings that are beyond his range of 
natural variation. Distortion can be caused by temporary impairment due to illness, injury to 
the writing hand or arm, substance abuse, extreme physical weakness, unusual writing 
environment, irregular or unusual writing surface, or unfamiliar writing materials, or might 
be permanent due to extreme age and feebleness. Fraud examiners should be aware that 
distortions in writings can, on occasion, be so severe that positive identifications of a 
person’s writings might not be possible, even by experts.  
 
Forgeries 
A forgery is defined as any writing prepared with the intent to deceive or defraud. Most 
forgeries are signatures. Forgery can be done by simulation, by tracing, or by freehand preparation.  
 
SIMULATED AND TRACED FORGERIES  
A simulated or traced forgery is a writing, usually a signature, prepared by carefully copying 
or tracing a model example of another person’s writings. Although identifiable as a forgery, a 
simulated or traced signature forgery often does not contain enough normal handwriting 
characteristics of the forger to permit expert identification. 
 
Remember, no one writes his signature exactly the same way twice. If two signatures look 
exactly alike, try superimposing the signature areas of the two documents by holding them in 
front of a bright light. If they precisely match, then one or both are traced forgeries. Be 
aware that in some instances it might be possible to locate the original document bearing the 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.111 
genuine signature that was traced. This regularly occurs in employee fraud and 
embezzlement cases in banks and other financial institutions where the account holder’s 
signature card on file served as the source for the tracing. If the forged signature(s) precisely 
superimposes over the genuine signature, then it is also likely that faint indentations might 
be present in the signature area of the original genuine document. Also, ink traces from the 
genuine signature might be transferred to the reverse side of the traced signature(s). Latent 
fingerprint treatment of the original source document might reveal the fingerprints of  
the suspect. 
  
FREEHAND FORGERIES  
A freehand forgery occurs when a writer signs the name of another person without knowing 
what the real person’s signature looks like. The writers of freehand forgeries can usually be 
identified by experts. 
 
AUTOFORGERIES  
The true-name signature of a person, prepared by him in a distorted or disguised fashion in 
order to later deny it and disclaim it as genuine. This attempt at fraud has occurred in falsely 
reported traveler’s check theft cases, in cases involving disputed home mortgage and other 
loan documents, credit card frauds, and others.  
 
 
The Document Expert’s Findings 
A forensic document examiner cannot determine with accuracy the writer’s age, sex, race, 
which hand was used, physical or mental condition, personality, or character from 
handwriting examinations. There are three basic outcomes of forensic handwriting 
comparisons. 
 
Non-Identification  
The suspected person did not write the signature or other writings on the questioned 
document. 
 
Identification  
The suspected person did write the signature or other writings on the questioned document. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.112   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inconclusive  
No definite determinations were possible as to whether the suspected person did or did not 
write the signature or other writings on the questioned document. This outcome is often the 
result of insufficient or inadequate handwriting samples of the suspect or when a photocopy 
rather that the original document is submitted to the expert for examinations.  
 
Though inconclusive, some writings might contain sufficient characteristics in common to 
indicate possible identity, or sufficient differences to indicate that the suspected person 
might not have prepared the writings. The expert might suggest additional leads for the 
fraud examiner that could resolve the inconclusive results of the comparisons. 
 
 
How to Obtain Handwriting Samples 
Positive results from forensic handwriting examinations and comparisons often depend on 
how well the fraud examiner has assembled adequate handwriting and signature samples of 
the suspects for submission to the forensic expert. The samples must be comparable to the 
writings on the evidence documents. Hand printing cannot be compared with handwriting. 
Capital letters cannot be compared with small letters. The samples must contain the same 
letters and combinations of letters, whether undictated or dictated. For example: “John” 
cannot be compared with “Susan,” “hot” with “c old,” “black” with “white,” or “July” with 
“September.” 
  
Undictated Writing Samples 
Try to obtain samples of a suspect or victim’s signature or other writings that were not 
prepared by him specifically for comparison purposes, but that can be authenticated. Courts 
will accept as authentic comparison documents any writings that were witnessed by others. 
Also acceptable are documents that were created “in the normal course of business,” such as 
canceled checks; signed or written documents in employee personnel records; applications 
for employment, licenses, or home utilities installations; and many others. The fraud 
examiner should use personal experiences and knowledge of the suspect’s routine activities 
in locating sources for these types of samples. 
 
When the evidence documents include suspected forged signatures, several genuine samples 
of the forgery victim’s signature should be obtai ned for submission to the expert. If possible, 
include any documents bearing genuine signatures of the victim’s that the suspect might 
have had access to and that might have served as a model for tracing or simulation. 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.113 
 Undictated writing samples should: 
• Be as contemporaneous as possible to the date of the evidence documents; if the 
questioned writings were prepared in the 1970s, writings recently prepared by a suspect 
might not be adequate for comparisons. However, except for infirmity or extreme age, 
the writings of most adults usually do not change much except over long periods of time.  
• Consist of the same signature or words containing many of the same letters and 
combinations of letters as the questioned writings on the evidence documents. 
• Consist of the same type of writings as on the evidence documents, such as hand printed 
or handwritten, capital letters or small letters or a combination of both. 
• Consist, if possible, of the same kinds of writings. A person’s informal writings, such as 
hastily prepared signatures on credit card receipts, might be very different from more 
formal writings, such as a signature on a contract or other legal document. 
 
Dictated Writing Samples 
Try to obtain dictated samples of a suspect’s or victim’s signature or writings specifically for 
comparison purposes, either voluntarily or by obtaining a legal order. 
 
Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples by Court Order 
When obtaining a legal order for samples, the investigator and/or attorney should ensure 
that the order specifies that the samples should be provided in the writer’s normal 
handwriting and in sufficient quantity, text, and form, at the interviewer’s discretion, to 
permit a determination of identity or non-identity. A court order with these specifications 
will permit an inference of guilt, or might allow pursuit of contempt of court charges if the 
suspect refuses to comply or attempts to prevent identification by intentionally disguising his 
writings, limiting the amount of writings, or failing to follow the interviewer’s instructions 
and dictations. 
  
Preparation for Taking Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Since expert handwriting identifications can truly prove the case, adequate pre-interview 
preparation by the fraud examiner is essential. At the time of the interview session to obtain 
dictated writing samples, the investigator should have all of the proper writing materials and 
should have the original or copies of the evidence documents to serve as a guide for 
dictating the sample text. Do not rush through the interview. Take as much time as 
necessary. Take short comfort breaks if the suspect tires. Do not allow the suspect to see the 
evidence documents before or during the taking of the samples. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Directions for Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Dictated writing samples should be obtained by using the same types of materials as the 
evidence document: writing instrument (ball-point pen, fountain pen, pencil, etc.), paper 
(lined, unlined, size of sheet), and forms (check forms, business forms, etc.). For purposes of 
the samples, an investigator can use a genuine form of the same or similar kind, make many 
photocopies of it, and have the samples prepared on the blank copies. 
 
To help the suspect relax, begin by having him write miscellaneous innocuous text, such as 
his name, the date, and a statement as to the voluntary nature of the samples being prepared. 
This statement will also assist later in getting the samples admitted in court.  
 
Patiently dictate to the suspect the same text or text containing the same letters and 
combinations of letters of the same type (hand printed, handwritten, capital, or small letters) 
as the questioned writings on the evidence document. Do not assist the suspect in the 
spelling of words, punctuation, or grammar. 
 
Obtain one sample at a time on separate sheets or forms. Once a sample is complete, 
remove it from the suspect’s sight before the next sample is prepared. To ensure that the 
suspect’s range of normal variation is displayed, several samples of each text should  
be obtained.  
 
Be alert for any attempts to disguise normal writings, such as exaggerated slant, very rapid 
writing, very slow and awkward writing, unusually large or small writing, or bizarre letter 
formations. (See the “Natural Variation, Disguise, Distortion, and Forgeries” section.)  
 
 
Typewriters and Computer Printers 
Typewriting prepared on traditional typebar/segment-shift typewriters, both manual and 
electric, can often be positively identified by experts from mechanical defects unique to each 
machine. Typewritten texts prepared on later-model typewriters equipped with 
interchangeable daisy wheel, ball, or basket-type elements are difficult, if not impossible to 
identify. Computerized dot matrix, ink jet, thermal transfer, or laser (electrostatic) printers 
are rarely identifiable. Usually, the only expert determinations concerning these typewriters 
and printers are that the same typeface design and size (font), letter spacing, and print 
process were used. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.115 
Typewriter Ribbons Could Be Evidence 
Old-style fabric typewriter ribbons are rarely of any value in determining whether a particular 
typewriter was used to prepare a questioned document. Fortunately for investigators, most 
modern manual and electric typewriters, regardless of whether typebar or single element, are 
equipped with single-use ribbons. If it is suspected that an evidence document was recently 
prepared on such a machine, removal and examination of the ribbon might reveal the text of 
the document. Expert examination of the ribbon might positively prove that the typewriter 
and ribbon were used to produce the document. 
 
Avoid Taking Unnecessary Samples 
Fraud examiners do not have to be experts to make preliminary eliminations of some 
suspect typewriters and narrow down the number of typewriters they might have to take 
samples from. Although there are hundreds of different fonts in use on computer printers, 
traditional manual and some electronic typewriters might be eliminated by differences in 
their typeface designs. 
  
Although fonts might appear to be very similar, the observant fraud examiner can 
differentiate between them by concentrating on those letters and numerals that most often 
differ. Note first whether the letter styles on the evidence document and the typewriter are 
serif (the letters have small horizontal bars at the top and bottom of the letters, like little feet) 
or sans serif (no small bars). If they differ, then the typewriter is not the one used. Next, look 
at the shapes of the letters and numerals. Pay particular attention to the small letters f, g, r, t, 
and w, and the numerals 2, 3, 4, and 5. If any of those differ in shape, then the typewriter is 
not the one used.  
 
Taking Typewriter Samples 
Always remove, retain, and preserve the original ribbon first, before taking any samples. 
Place it in a sealed envelope and initial it for later identification. After removing and 
preserving the original ribbon, replace it with a new one and type the samples in the same 
text as the questioned document. Repeat portions of the questioned text several times. After 
taking samples with a ribbon, shift the ribbon adjustment to the “stencil” position.  
 
Insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directly onto the carbon 
paper, using it as a “ribbon” to make typed text on the sheet of paper. Again, type the 
questioned text several times. As each specimen is made, record the brand name, model, and 
serial number of the typewriter used and initial and date each sheet. Place the ribbon and 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
specimens in a plastic or heavy envelope and submit them to the expert along with the 
questioned evidence documents in separate envelopes. 
 
 
Photocopies 
Increasingly, photocopies are retained as “original” records of documents (particularly in 
outgoing correspondence files) and can become the only evidence of a document because 
the original document cannot be located or, in some cases, cannot be released, such as in the 
case of official public records 
 
Fraud examiners and other investigators sometimes submit a copy of a document for 
examination because they do not wish to part with the original. As a result, the document 
examiner will probably not be able to determine features and reach conclusions that could 
have been made from the original document. When at all possible, the fraud examiner 
should obtain the original document for the document examiner and should not submit  
a copy. 
 
Identifying the Source of a Photocopy 
Photocopies can be the actual original evidence in the case of: 
• Anonymous letters 
• Unauthorized “leaks” of information in the fo rm of copies of letters, memoranda, files, 
and other records 
• Copies made to conceal forgeries or to insert or manipulate text 
• Spurious “disinformation” dissemination of phony official documents 
 
Locating the source of a copy can be crucial in some investigations. It is sometimes possible 
to determine what kind of copier was used to produce the copy in question. Some types of 
machines leave minute markings, indentations, and other features on the copy that will assist 
the expert in determining the brand and model of the machine used. It is also possible to 
identify the particular machine used by examining the pattern of unique and identifiable 
“trash marks” (specks, spots, streaks, edge markings, etc.) it leaves on copies and comparing 
them with copies from a known machine. The fraud examiner should be aware, however, 
that some of these markings have permanence while others are transient and temporary. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.117 
Permanent “Trash Marks”  
These uniquely identifiable markings on copies are usually caused by accidental deep 
scratches and imperfections in the copier’s glass surface or document cover, in the printing 
element surface, or other permanent machine parts that are not readily replaced or changed 
during servicing of the machine. These marks can be reproduced on copies for years until 
the machine is repaired or the part replaced. 
 
Transient “Trash Marks”  
Trash marks are uniquely identifiable markings on copies. They are usually caused by dirt, 
smudges, or small bits of foreign matter on or in machine surfaces that will appear until the 
machine is cleaned or serviced. These markings prove not only that a particular machine was 
used to produce the copy, but that documents that share the same transient trash marks 
might have been produced at approximately the same time. This is one of several ways to 
determine when a document was prepared. 
 
Taking Photocopier Samples 
First, without placing any document in the machine, make six “blank” copies. As the 
machine produces each “copy,” remove it, turn it over and on the reverse side initial and 
number each copy in the same sequence they were produced by the machine (these copies will 
reproduce all “trash marks” made by the machine, including the entire document cover, glass 
surface, and internal printing element surface. Six sample copies are needed since different 
models of machines have varying printing element surface sizes, usually ranging in size from 
one to three sheet impressions before repeating on the same area of the surface). 
 
Second, place a ruler or other calibrated measuring device on the glass document surface, 
close the cover, and make six copies. (These copies will permit a determination of the 
standard amount of reduction or enlargement the machine makes when in the “actual size” 
or one-to-one mode.) If the machine requires documents to be fed into it, rather than having 
a glass document surface, use any sample document available as an “original” and include 
that sample document along with the copies of it. On the reverse of each copy, initial and 
number the copies in the same sequence they were produced by the machine, as outlined in 
the first step. 
 
Third, place a sample document containing both typewritten and handwritten text on the 
glass document surface in the standard position, close the document cover, and again print 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.118   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
six copies, initialing and numbering as previously directed. Also include the sample 
document with the copy samples. 
 
Place all of the sample copies and sample documents into a large sturdy paper or cardboard 
envelope or folder (do not use a plastic envelope) on which you have previously noted the 
make, model, and location of the machine. Initial, date, and seal the envelope and submit it 
to the document examiner along with the questioned evidence documents. 
 
 
Dating a Document 
Is the document genuine, or a back-dated fabrication? This question sometimes arises during 
fraud inquiries, and the answer can be determined through scientific examinations of the 
document by forensic experts. The fraud examiner should be alert for this type of fraud and 
have some knowledge of what can be done, as well as an awareness of the limitations. 
  
The “Alibi” Document 
These documents suddenly appear “from out of nowhere” and often late in the course of  
an investigation, inquiry, or trial. They are always favorable to the suspect and refute 
previously developed information or evidence that is damaging to the suspect. Many prove 
to be fabricated. 
 
The “Long Lost” Will 
The sudden appearance of a new will that post-dates and supersedes all other wills is all too 
common. Amazingly, it often leaves large portions of the estate to the person who found it, 
and only a photocopy can be located. Many prove to have been fabricated using the cut-and-paste 
method. Although not involving photocopies, the much publicized fabricated and 
forged “Mormon Will” of Howard Hughes in the mid-1970s is a prime example. 
 
Valuable Historical and Collectible Documents 
The production of phony historical and collectible documents, artworks, and antiques has 
been a lucrative field for fraud artists for hundreds of years and continues to the present. 
Recent major frauds involving losses of millions of dollars have involved such diverse phony 
documents as the fake “Hitler Diaries,” counterfeited rare baseball cards, forged autographs 
of historical figures and celebrities, fake old treaties with Native American tribes, newly 
discovered handwritten “rough drafts” of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, Lincoln’s 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.119 
Gettysburg Address and other famous historical documents, several counterfeited and 
forged “Mormon” documents, counterfeited “first edition” books, and many others. 
 
Anachronisms in Documentary Materials 
Exposure of fraudulent historical documents often relies upon the combined skills of 
investigators, historical experts, scientific laboratories, and forensic document examiners. 
Accurate handwriting comparisons are rarely possible in the absence of adequate 
contemporaneous genuine writings of the purported author. Instead, examinations are made 
of the materials used to produce the documents, such as paper, ink, printing, adhesives and 
seals, bindings, and covers. Detection of backdated contemporary documents usually relies 
upon diligent investigation and the techniques of the forensic document examiner. 
 
When adequate handwriting or signature samples are available, expert comparisons can 
expose the forgery. Otherwise, in order to disprove the purported date of the document, 
analyses of the materials might prove that they did not exist at the time the document was 
supposedly prepared. Expert examinations of contemporary documentary materials include: 
• Ink analyses and comparisons with a library of ink standards maintained by the U.S. 
Secret Service Laboratory in Washington, D.C., to determine the kind of ink and when it 
was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of typewriting and comparisons with collections of typewriter reference 
standards maintained by forensic laboratories to determine the kind of typewriter that 
was used and when the typewriter was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of paper, especially watermarked paper, and searches of reference 
materials to determine who manufactured the paper and when it was first produced. 
• Examinations of photocopies and fax copies and comparisons with reference standards 
to determine what kind of machine was used and when those machines were first 
produced. 
• Comparisons of questioned photocopies with photocopies known to have been 
produced on a particular machine on a particular date can prove or disprove the date of 
the questioned copy. 
 
Fraud examiners should note that there are currently no methods for accurately determining 
how long ink, typewriting, or photocopier/printer toner have been on paper. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.120   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Indented Writings 
Fraud examiners should be alert for the presence of incriminating indented writings, or the 
absence of logical indentations, both of which can be valuable in proving fraud. In some 
situations, documents are routinely kept in multiple-page sets, such as in legal forms, 
multiple-copy invoices, notebooks, tablets, pads, clipboards, and so on. In these situations 
the writings on one sheet should correspond to indentations on the following sheet. The 
absence of corresponding indented writings on the following sheet, or the presence of 
indented writings on one sheet that do not correspond with the text of the writings on the 
preceding sheet, could provide proof that pages have been removed and substituted. 
 
Developing Indented Writings 
Never attempt to develop indented writings by shading or scratching on the surface of a 
sheet of paper with a pencil. This will reveal deep indentations, but it will not reveal the faint 
ones and will permanently prevent expert examinations from developing them. Other types 
of technical examinations might also be prevented by this defacing of the document. 
 
Some indented writings can be visualized by taking the document to an area with subdued 
overhead lighting, placing the document on a flat surface, and shining a bright beam of light 
from a small-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp across the paper surface at a low 
oblique angle or parallel to the surface. Since shadows in the indentations will only show at 
right angles to the beam of light, it will be necessary to move the light around in several 
positions and note the changing shadows as they form the text of the indentations. 
 
Document experts use special lighting and photographic techniques and sensitive 
instruments such as the electrostatic detection apparatus (ESDA) to detect and permanently 
record extremely faint indented writings that cannot be visualized by the oblique-lighting 
method.  
 
 
Counterfeit Printed Documents 
Most documents that have monetary value, such as currency, bank checks, traveler’s checks, 
money orders, bearer bonds, postage stamps, gift certificates, or lottery tickets, have all been 
counterfeited at one time or another. Identity documents are also often counterfeited, for 
example, passports, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and government and commercial 
employee identity cards. Other counterfeited documents include commercial product labels, 
business stationery and forms, business logos, motor vehicle titles and registration forms, 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.121 
and safety inspection stickers. Despite most preventive measures, if a document has any 
value it can be, and probably has been, counterfeited. Counterfeiting has become big 
business, especially in some third-world countries, where the latest developments in printing 
technology are being used to produce large quantities of high-quality counterfeit documents 
and “knock-off” phony products in violation of international copyright and trademark laws. 
 
Counterfeiting Methods 
The days of old-style counterfeiters — who were skilled artisans who carefully etched 
counterfeit printing plates — are over. Today most counterfeit documents are prepared by 
various photo-reproduction processes such as the photo-offset printing process 
(lithography) and flexography, which uses rubberized printing “plates.” These processes 
begin with the photographic reproduction of a genuine document. The photographic 
negatives are then carefully retouched to remove the filled-in text, serial numbers, and other 
distinguishing features that appeared on the genuine document. Printing plates are then 
made from the retouched negatives, and counterfeit copies are printed from the plates.  
 
Rapidly advancing technology now allows larcenous novices with no commercial printing 
experience to use sophisticated computerized scanners, computer graphics software, 
multicolor computer printers, and full-color photocopy machines to produce relatively high-quality 
counterfeit documents. 
 
Detecting Counterfeits 
Many counterfeits can be detected by making a side-by-side comparison with a 
corresponding genuine document. Be alert for different versions or form revisions. Look for 
subtle differences in ink colors and brilliance, different types of paper substrate, the use of 
different typestyles and type sizes (fonts), and evidence of the retouching the text on the 
genuine document used in the reproduction. The retouching will be most evident in areas 
where text, serial numbers, and the like are superimposed on a background design, especially 
if they are printed in black ink. 
 
When furnished with genuine documents for comparisons with suspected counterfeits, 
forensic document examiners can also make expert differentiations between the printing 
processes, ink formulations, and paper substrates used. In some instances it has been 
possible for the experts to reconstruct portions of the filled-in text or serial numbers that 
appeared on the genuine document, but were removed in the retouching process. In this 
fashion the specific original document used by the counterfeiter can sometimes be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.122   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
determined. By tracing the history of the document’s ownership, the counterfeiter can be 
located and identified. Treatment of the original genuine document for latent  
fingerprints might positively identify the counterfeiter and other people who handled the 
genuine document. 
 
 
Fingerprints 
Latent (non-visible) prints are left on surfaces by the body oils, salts, and amino acids 
clinging to or exuded by friction ridges in the skin on fingers, palms of the hands, and soles 
of the feet and are unique personal identifiers. Latent prints might also be deposited on 
surfaces by hands, fingers, and bare feet through the transfer of oils and greases. Patent 
(visible) prints are sometimes deposited on surfaces by hands, fingers, and bare feet through 
the transfer of materials such as blood, paint, soot, and soil. 
  
Latent prints absorbed into protected porous sur faces, such as paper in files or pages in 
books, have been known to survive for decades and still be identifiable after chemical 
development. However, latent fingerprints on hard, non-porous surfaces can be destroyed or 
deteriorate rapidly if handled; not protected fr om the environment; or exposed to high 
temperatures, humidity, or water. 
 
Fraud examiners should wear protective gloves or carefully use tweezers when handling 
latent fingerprint evidence to avoid smudging and contamination. Tweezers should not be 
used on documents if indented writing or photocopier examinations are planned.  
 
Fingerprints on Paper or Other Absorbent Porous Surfaces 
Fraud examiners should never try to develop latent fingerprints that have been absorbed into 
paper or other porous materials by dusting with fingerprint powder or any other means. 
 
Such efforts will not only be unsuccessful, but will prevent additional examinations. Preserve 
the evidence by placing the item into a plastic bag or cellophane protector. Label the 
container with the examiner’s initials, the date, and an identifying exhibit number. Experts 
will use various methods on these materials, including iodine fuming and brushing or 
spraying silver nitrate solution or ninhydrin spray, which reacts with the body chemicals and 
other substances in the latent print that have soaked into the absorbent surface. Some of 
these methods will permanently discolor a document.  
  
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.123 
Fingerprints on Hard, Non-Porous Surfaces 
Items with hard, non-porous surfaces, such as plastic, metal, and glass, can be dusted for the 
presence of latent fingerprints left on their surfaces. Special fingerprint dusting powders and 
lifting materials are available from law enforcement suppliers. The dry, powdered toner used 
in some photocopy machines has also been used successfully for fingerprint dusting. 
 
After dusting the surface and locating a suspected print or partial print, blow or gently brush 
off the excess powder. Remove the developed print with adhesive lifting tape and place the 
tape on an index card that contrasts in color with the dusting powder used. Mark the card 
with initials, the date, an identifying exhibit number, and where the print was found.  
 
Some latent prints on non-porous surfaces might not be developed by the dusting method. 
If possible, rather than dusting the item, the fraud examiner should retain it; place it in a 
protective container; initial, date, and label the container with an identifying exhibit number; 
and submit it to a fingerprint expert for processing. Rather than dusting, fingerprint experts 
might use cyanoacrylate (“super-glue”) fuming or a laser to successfully develop and 
photograph the latent prints on some materials, such as black plastic bags.  
 
Fingerprint Comparison Standards 
The fingerprints of millions of people are on record in repositories of fingerprint cards 
maintained by law enforcement agencies throughout the world. These cards contain the 
inked fingerprints of people who have been arrested, served in the military, applied for 
employment at various levels of government, and volunteered their fingerprints to assist in 
personal identification in the event of their deaths. Many of these fingerprint databases have 
been computerized and are linked by networks. However, millions of people do not fit in 
any of these categories and have never been fingerprinted. 
  
If a suspect has never been fingerprinted or refuses to voluntarily furnish inked print 
samples, it might be necessary for the fraud examiner to obtain a legal court order directing 
the suspect to furnish inked prints for identification purposes. Even though the evidence 
items might have been handled by several people, they might still bear latent prints of the 
guilty party. If the items have been inadvertently handled by other known people, including 
the fraud examiner, then inked prints of all of those people should also be obtained and 
submitted to the fingerprint expert along with the evidence items and the inked prints  
of suspects. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.124   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources for Expert Document Examinations 
 
Law Enforcement Laboratories 
In cases where criminal prosecutions are likely, there are excellent forensic laboratories 
available through law enforcement agencies at the local, state, and national levels of the 
criminal justice system. 
 
Forensic Document Experts in Private Practice 
When an expert’s services are needed, a fraud examiner can identify and locate fully 
qualified, court-certified, expert forensic document examiners available in a particular 
geographical area by contacting the following organizations: 
 
American Board of Forensic Document Examiners 
7887 San Felipe, Suite 122 
Houston, Texas 77063 
(713) 784-9537 
www.abfde.org 
 
American Academy of Forensic Sciences 
410 North 21st Street 
Colorado Springs, Colorado 80904-2798 
(719) 636-1100 
www.aafs.org 
 
Graphologists (Graphoanalysts) 
Graphology (graphoanalysis) has been described as a pseudoscience whose practitioners 
have the purported ability to determine a person’s character, moral traits, personality, and 
mental state based upon an analysis of that person’s handwriting. Graphology is often 
erroneously confused with forensic document examinations, especially by the media. Fraud 
examiners should be aware that some people who practice graphological analyses might have 
little academic and scientific training. They might be self-taught or graduates of a 
correspondence course. Since a conclusive accuracy level has not been established for those 
examinations, expert testimony by graphologists is often rejected by the courts. Fraud 
examiners should be cautious in relying on handwriting identifications made by some of 
these “handwriting experts.”  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.201 



:


analyz document
the fraud examin will usual obtain a great deal of documentari evid it is critic that
the examin understand the relev of thi evid and how it should be preserv and
present alwai keep in mind that document can either help or hurt a case depend on
which on ar present and how thei ar present the goal is to make certain that all
relev document ar includ and all irrelev document ar elimin mani
examin pai too much attent to document it is easi to get bog down in detail
when examin record and to lose sight of a simpl fact document do not make case
wit make case the document make or break the wit socal paper case often
confus and bore a juri
basic procedur in handl evid ar requir for it to be accept by the court
proof must be provid that the evid is relev and materi evid submit
must be properli identifi and it must be establish that the proper chain of custodi
wa maintain
the relev of document cannot be easili determin earli in a case for that reason all
possibl relev document should be obtain if thei ar not need thei can alwai be
return here ar a few gener rule regard the collect of document
obtain origin document where feasibl make work copi for review and keep the
origin segreg
do not touch origin ani more than necessari thei might later have to undergo
forens analysi
maintain a good file system for the document thi is especi critic when larg
number of document ar obtain lose a kei document is an unpardon sin and
can mortal damag the case document can be stamp sequenti for easi
refer
obtain documentari evid
documentari evid mai be obtain in a number of wai if both parti agre it is
possibl to obtain evid by consent thi is the prefer method consent can be oral or
written when inform is obtain from possibl advers wit or the target of the
examin it is recommend that the consent be in write sampl form ar contain
analyz document investig
3102 2011 fraud examin manual
in the appendix to the report write chapter in mani case howev the investig
will not wish to alert the suspect to hi intent and other rout must be taken
if the evid is own by and in the control of the parti that request the inform
eg in an employe desk drawer at the offic then the investig is usual abl to
obtain the document as requir
if howev evid is held by other parti or in uncontrol locat specif legal
action is requir most often the legal process us take the form of a subpoena or other
court order to produc the document and record includ electron record other
form of court order can be us to obtain wit evid and statement
under no circumst should the investig attempt to obtain document by other
mean as thi can lead to charg of theft trespass and other sanction further detail ar
provid in the law section of the fraud examin manual
type of evid
there ar two basic type of admiss evid direct or circumstanti direct evid
show prima faci the fact at issu it prove the fact directli what constitut direct
evid depend on the factor involv for exampl in the linda reed collin case
involv possibl kickback which is includ in the appendix to thi section direct
evid might be a check from the vendor to her
circumstanti evid is that which indirectli show culpabl in the case of a kickback
alleg against collin cash deposit of unknown origin deposit to her account around
the time of the suspect transact could be consid circumstanti evid
organ of evid
keep track of the amount of paper gener is on of the biggest problem in fraud
case it is essenti that document obtain be properli organ earli on in an
examin and that thei be continu reorgan as the case progress rememb it
is usual difficult to ascertain the relev of the evid earli in the case good
organ in complex case includ the follow
segreg document by either wit or transact in the first method the
examin take the list of name whether employe associ or wit and begin
assembl collect document by wit altern the fraud examin might find
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3103
it easier to organ the inform by group evid of the same or similar
transact togeth chronolog organ howev is the least prefer
method
make a kei document file a separ file that contain copi of certain import piec
of inform for quick access for easi access to the most relev document
period review the kei document move the less import document to backup
file and keep onli the most relev document in the main file
establish a databas earli if there is a larg amount of inform to process thi
databas can be manual or computer and access by keyword or bate stamp
number the databas should includ at a minimum the date of the document the
individu from whom the document wa obtain the date obtain a brief
descript and the subject to whom the document pertain
chronolog
a chronolog of event should be commenc earli in the case the purpos of maintain
a chronolog is to establish the chain of event lead to the proof the chronolog might
or might not be made a part of the formal report at a minimum it can be us for analysi
of the case and place in a work paper binder keep the chronolog brief and includ
onli inform necessari to prove the case by make the chronolog too detail you
defeat it purpos the chronolog should be revis as necessari ad new inform
and delet
the irrelev
todo list
anoth indispens aid is the todo list the list which must be updat frequent
should be kept in a stenograph pad or other perman ring binder to allow a cumul
record in a veri complex case the list can be broken into long and shortterm object
that which must be done eventu eg prove element of a particular count and that
which should be done tomorrow eg conduct an interview or draft a subpoena howev
organ some sort of list must be kept otherwis import point will be forgotten in the
lengthi case a sampl checklist is includ in the report write chapter
examin fraudul document
forg alter fabric and other suspici document ar regularli encount in
fraud case most busi legal issu or financi transact will produc a substanti
analyz document investig
3104 2011 fraud examin manual
amount of paper includ contract agreement will order form invoic and
statement these document can be evid in establish that a fraud wa commit in
determin the natur and scope of the fraud and in identifi the parti respons
the fraud examin is not expect to be a document expert he should howev be awar
of wai to spot phoni document and have knowledg of the capabl and limit of
forens examin in addit if the fraud examin suspect that signific document
ar phoni he should consid consult with an expert expert forens examin
conduct as a part of a fraud investig can contribut to it success in sever wai
expert examin result can assist in develop and prove the fraud theori who
did what and when thei did it
expert examin result can corrobor or refut statement by wit or fraud
suspect
have the result of expert examin befor interview can provid signific
leverag for the examin dure hi interview with fraud suspect even result in
admiss of guilt from suspect who ar confront with the factual evid
forens handwrit examin and comparison can result in the posit
identif of the writer or signer of a document sinc write is a consciou act the
identif might serv to prove that a particular act is intent or will proof of
intent is usual necessari to prosecut a wrongdoer successfulli
earli consult with an expert can prove valuabl
an expert assist can be of valu earli in an investig not just in prepar for a
trial fraud examin should consid consult with expert earli in their investig or
inquiri if thei suspect that signific document ar phoni or have been forg alter or
otherwis manipul mani time the scope of an investig can be narrow or
direct by elimin multipl suspect through handwrit examin the expert
find might solidifi the fraud examin theori of how the fraud wa commit or
thei can prevent wast effort by prove theori incorrect at an earlier stage see the end
of thi section for more inform about find help in document examin
type of forens document examin
there ar mani differ type of forens document examin howev most
examin more than 95 percent of all us feder bureau of investig laboratori
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3105
document examin for exampl concern signatur handwrit hand print or
document creat by a typewrit or word processor addition issu concern
photocopi and determin when a document wa prepar frequent aris fraud
examin should be awar that mani differ type of forens examin ar possibl
but that the follow forens examin could be of particular valu when a fraud
involv document
detect of forg signatur
identif of the writer of signatur handwrit and hand print
detect alter document
detect and restor erasur and erad
determin when a document wa or wa not prepar
detect counterfeit document and examin print document
detect and restor faint indent write
comparison of paper and ink
determin whether two sheet of paper came from the same tablet or pad of paper
examin of paper fold and sequenc of fold
comparison of torn or cut paper edg
restor of char and partial burn document
identifi the machin that made a photocopi and whether two copi were made on
the same machin
examin of facsimil fax copi
identifi the sourc of or alter to notari seal wax seal and cachet
detect the open and reseal of seal document and examin adhes
detect insert text in typewritten print or handwritten document
determin the sequenc of handwritten text signatur and typewrit
identifi rubber stamp impress
identifi mechan checkwrit and numberingdevic impress
handl document as physic evid
a document can be a piec of physic evid and not just a sourc of inform as a
piec of evid it should be handl carefulli and store properli in a seal initi and
date paper folder or envelop to avoid damag or contamin if necessari make a
work copi and preserv the origin document for submiss to a forens document
examin most forens examin will requir the origin document not a copi of it
analyz document investig
3106 2011 fraud examin manual
sinc most photocopi do not reproduc origin write typewrit or other featur
with suffici clariti or detail to allow adequ examin
when initi a document for futur identif do it in a noncrit area and us a
differ type of write instrument than wa us for the question write on the
document the examin should never write or make mark on the origin document
other than hi unobtrus initi for identif do not add new fold stapl it place
paper clip on it crumpl it or do anyth els that would affect or chang it origin
condit if store in an envelop be care not to write on the envelop and caus
indent on the origin document insid photocopi and laserprint document
should alwai be store in paper folder or envelop not transpar plastic envelop
which can result in the copi stick to the plastic and destroi some featur of the
document
chain of custodi
from the moment evid is receiv it chain of custodi must be maintain for it to be
accept by the court thi mean that a record must be made when the item is receiv or
when it leav the care custodi or control of the fraud examin thi is best handl by a
memorandum of interview with the custodian of the record when the evid is receiv
the memorandum should state
what item were receiv
when thei were receiv
from whom thei were receiv
where thei ar maintain
if the item is later turn over to someon els a record of thi should be madeprefer
in memorandum form all evid receiv should be uniqu mark so that it can be
identifi later the prefer wai is to initi and date the item howev thi can pose
problem in the case of origin busi record furnish voluntarili for them a small tick
mark or other nondescript identifi can be us if it is not practic to mark the origin
document it should be place in a seal envelop which should then be initi and date
preserv for fingerprint examin
if fingerprint examin ar anticip us glove to handl the document be care if
tweezer ar us becaus thei can leav indent that might obscur faint indent
write or the identifi indent that ar sometim left by photocopi and fax
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3107
machin if you or other known peopl have inadvert handl the document with
bare hand your name should be provid to the fingerprint specialist it might be
necessari to provid the expert with set of ink fingerprint of these peopl for
elimin purpos see the fingerprint section for addit inform
char or partial burn document
these document might contain valuabl evid if restor by expert but thei ar veri
fragil and should be handl with extrem care for proper preserv and storag
train expert might us special polyest film sheet and envelop which ar not readili
avail to the fraud examin the examin can best preserv such evid for
submiss to the forens expert by us a sturdi crushproof contain into which he
place layer of cotton avail in roll at fabric and sew materi shop carefulli slide
a sheet of paper or thin cardboard under the burn fragment lift them and place them on
the layer of cotton then remov the paper us for lift gentli place addit layer of
cotton over the fragment until the contain is fill do not compress the cotton seal the
contain initi and date it add an identifi content label or exhibit number and clearli
write or stamp fragil on the contain
recogn phoni document
forens document examin appli scientif method and us a varieti of technic
instrument in conduct examin and comparison of document individu minut
characterist in handwrit and typewrit ar examin and compar with genuin
comparison standard detail analys ar made of document featur for proof of
chang or modif instrument us includ sensit measur devic lowpow
magnifi glass sever type of microscop ultraviolet and infrar light optic
filter micro and macro photographi computer imageenhanc system sensit
instrument to detect faint indent write and numer other variou chemic
analys ar also conduct
although not expect to be a document expert an observ fraud examin might be
abl to recogn some featur of document that could alert him to their fraudul natur
signatur forgeri might be recogn by irregular notic in the written letter
andor by their differ in size from a genuin signatur a sidebysid comparison
with a genuin signatur might reveal the differ howev rememb that advanc
ag poor health temporari injuri and the us of drug and alcohol can result in similar
discrep and might mislead the examin genuin comparison sampl should be
analyz document investig
3108 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain and a forens document examin consult to make an expert determin
see the how to obtain handwrit sampl section
substitut page in multiplepag document such as contract and will can often be
spot by hold each page in front of a bright light differ in the white
densiti thick opac and paperfib pattern of the substitut sheet might be
appar
some ink differ alter erasur and obliter ar also reveal by hold the
paper in front of a bright light or hold a light over the write at differ angl and
observ differ in the color and reflect of the ink or disturb to the paper
surfac
counterfeit print document such as check stock and bond certif busi form
and stationeri birth certif driver licens and other identif document ar
sometim readili disclos by sidebysid comparison with correspond genuin
document be alert for the us of incorrect or differ version or form revis of
the document for forens examin it will be necessari to obtain and furnish
genuin comparison sampl of the print document to the document examin see
the counterfeit print document section
suspici indent write might be reveal by reduc the light in the room and hold
a bright beam of light a narrowbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp will do the
job low and parallel to the page surfac see the indent write section
identifi write
the develop of a person handwrit usual begin at an earli ag as part of hi
formal educ socal copybook style ar taught and the student ar instruct
through exercis to emul as nearli as possibl those letter format howev from
the veri begin the student write skill vari consider due to their differ
physic and mental capabl these differ between individu increas with ag
physic develop and the acquisit of skill differ aesthet valu differ in
educ and differ in the person and profession usag of write as a result each
person write contain a uniqu and identifi combin of acquir individu
person characterist and share class characterist forens document examin ar
train and experienc in examin and compar write and assess thi combin
of individu and class characterist in make expert determin of ident or
nonident
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3109
class characterist
fraud examin should not be misl in develop suspect by mistak similar class
characterist in differ write sampl sampl that seem to look alik ar not necessarili
from the same individu the write of some peopl might share superfici similar in
appear and style and look the same to the layman when in fact thei ar veri differ
forens document examin can correct thi mistak
copybook style
some of a writer letter shape handwrit tyle and other characterist might be share
by other writer becaus thei were taught the same origin copybook system in the unit
state differ state and differ school district within the state teach sever differ
copybook system internation differ system ar also taught writer might retain
remnant of the system thei learn as children as an exampl secondlanguag write of
peopl taught in a cyril russian alphabet style will be influenc by cyril letter style
and might contain some similar as anoth exampl the hand print and numer
style taught to draftsmen architect and engin might result in appar similar in
the hand print of peopl train in those profess
copycat style
some writer especi adolesc the young and the easili influenc might adopt the
gener handwrit style or some individu letter design of a respect teacher or parent
or on share by their peer an exampl is the exagger round letter form and
circular i dot and period that form the socal bubbl write of some adolesc
femal thi style is usual abandon as the person matur
natur variat disguis distort and forgeri
variat
no on sign hi signatur or write exactli the same wai twice becaus write is a human
act of coordin mental and muscular activ not the precis repetit action of a
machin howev each writer ha hi own fairli specif rang of natur variat sever
exampl of write ar necessari for a forens document examin to establish if a
question write is or is not within the rang of natur variat of a particular writer if
fraud examin find two signatur that ar exactli alik then at least on is a forgeri
probabl a trace
analyz document investig
3110 2011 fraud examin manual
disguis
disguis is the consciou intent effort by a person to chang or conceal hi normal
write disguis is attempt in an effort to prepar write that can later be disclaim or
that the writer hope will be anonym and cannot be trace to the sourc the success of
an attempt to disguis write depend on the writer skill and knowledg of write most
attempt at disguis involv on or more of the follow chang in slant chang in size
chang in shape of capit uppercas letter chang in the shape and size of loop in
letter that contain them us of bizarr letter design or block squar hand print onli
rare is the opposit nonwrit hand us fraud examin should be awar that it is
possibl to successfulli disguis write to the point that thei cannot be posit
identifi even by expert thi is especi true when onli limit amount of write
ar involv
distort
distort ar unintent chang to a person write that ar beyond hi rang of
natur variat distort can be caus by temporari impair due to ill injuri to
the write hand or arm substanc abus extrem physic weak unusu write
environ irregular or unusu write surfac or unfamiliar write materi or might
be perman due to extrem ag and feebl fraud examin should be awar that
distort in write can on occas be so sever that posit identif of a
person write might not be possibl even by expert
forgeri
a forgeri is defin as ani write prepar with the intent to deceiv or defraud most
forgeri ar signatur forgeri can be done by simul by trace or by freehand prepar
simul and trace forgeri
a simul or trace forgeri is a write usual a signatur prepar by carefulli copi
or trace a model exampl of anoth person write although identifi as a forgeri a
simul or trace signatur forgeri often doe not contain enough normal handwrit
characterist of the forger to permit expert identif
rememb no on write hi signatur exactli the same wai twice if two signatur look
exactli alik try superimpos the signatur area of the two document by hold them in
front of a bright light if thei precis match then on or both ar trace forgeri be
awar that in some instanc it might be possibl to locat the origin document bear the
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3111
genuin signatur that wa trace thi regularli occur in employe fraud and
embezzl case in bank and other financi institut where the account holder
signatur card on file serv as the sourc for the trace if the forg signatur precis
superimpos over the genuin signatur then it is also like that faint indent might
be present in the signatur area of the origin genuin document also ink trace from the
genuin signatur might be transfer to the revers side of the trace signatur latent
fingerprint treatment of the origin sourc document might reveal the fingerprint of
the suspect
freehand forgeri
a freehand forgeri occur when a writer sign the name of anoth person without know
what the real person signatur look like the writer of freehand forgeri can usual be
identifi by expert
autoforgeri
the truenam signatur of a person prepar by him in a distort or disguis fashion in
order to later deni it and disclaim it as genuin thi attempt at fraud ha occur in fals
report travel check theft case in case involv disput home mortgag and other
loan document credit card fraud and other
the document expert find
a forens document examin cannot determin with accuraci the writer ag sex race
which hand wa us physic or mental condit person or charact from
handwrit examin there ar three basic outcom of forens handwrit
comparison
nonidentif
the suspect person did not write the signatur or other write on the question
document
identif
the suspect person did write the signatur or other write on the question document
analyz document investig
3112 2011 fraud examin manual
inconclus
no definit determin were possibl as to whether the suspect person did or did not
write the signatur or other write on the question document thi outcom is often the
result of insuffici or inadequ handwrit sampl of the suspect or when a photocopi
rather that the origin document is submit to the expert for examin
though inconclus some write might contain suffici characterist in common to
indic possibl ident or suffici differ to indic that the suspect person
might not have prepar the write the expert might suggest addit lead for the
fraud examin that could resolv the inconclus result of the comparison
how to obtain handwrit sampl
posit result from forens handwrit examin and comparison often depend on
how well the fraud examin ha assembl adequ handwrit and signatur sampl of
the suspect for submiss to the forens expert the sampl must be compar to the
write on the evid document hand print cannot be compar with handwrit
capit letter cannot be compar with small letter the sampl must contain the same
letter and combin of letter whether undict or dictat for exampl john
cannot be compar with susan hot with c old black with white or juli with
septemb
undict write sampl
try to obtain sampl of a suspect or victim signatur or other write that were not
prepar by him specif for comparison purpos but that can be authent court
will accept as authent comparison document ani write that were wit by other
also accept ar document that were creat in the normal cours of busi such as
cancel check sign or written document in employe personnel record applic
for employ licens or home util instal and mani other the fraud
examin should us person experi and knowledg of the suspect routin activ
in locat sourc for these type of sampl
when the evid document includ suspect forg signatur sever genuin sampl
of the forgeri victim signatur should be obtai ned for submiss to the expert if possibl
includ ani document bear genuin signatur of the victim that the suspect might
have had access to and that might have serv as a model for trace or simul
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3113
undict write sampl should
be as contemporan as possibl to the date of the evid document if the
question write were prepar in the 1970 write recent prepar by a suspect
might not be adequ for comparison howev except for infirm or extrem ag
the write of most adult usual do not chang much except over long period of time
consist of the same signatur or word contain mani of the same letter and
combin of letter as the question write on the evid document
consist of the same type of write as on the evid document such as hand print
or handwritten capit letter or small letter or a combin of both
consist if possibl of the same kind of write a person inform write such as
hastili prepar signatur on credit card receipt might be veri differ from more
formal write such as a signatur on a contract or other legal document
dictat write sampl
try to obtain dictat sampl of a suspect or victim signatur or write specif for
comparison purpos either voluntarili or by obtain a legal order
obtain dictat handwrit sampl by court order
when obtain a legal order for sampl the investig andor attornei should ensur
that the order specifi that the sampl should be provid in the writer normal
handwrit and in suffici quantiti text and form at the interview discret to
permit a determin of ident or nonident a court order with these specif
will permit an infer of guilt or might allow pursuit of contempt of court charg if the
suspect refus to compli or attempt to prevent identif by intention disguis hi
write limit the amount of write or fail to follow the interview instruct
and dictat
prepar for take dictat handwrit sampl
sinc expert handwrit identif can truli prove the case adequ preinterview
prepar by the fraud examin is essenti at the time of the interview session to obtain
dictat write sampl the investig should have all of the proper write materi and
should have the origin or copi of the evid document to serv as a guid for
dictat the sampl text do not rush through the interview take as much time as
necessari take short comfort break if the suspect tire do not allow the suspect to see the
evid document befor or dure the take of the sampl
analyz document investig
3114 2011 fraud examin manual
direct for obtain dictat handwrit sampl
dictat write sampl should be obtain by us the same type of materi as the
evid document write instrument ballpoint pen fountain pen pencil etc paper
line unlin size of sheet and form check form busi form etc for purpos of
the sampl an investig can us a genuin form of the same or similar kind make mani
photocopi of it and have the sampl prepar on the blank copi
to help the suspect relax begin by have him write miscellan innocu text such as
hi name the date and a statement as to the voluntari natur of the sampl be prepar
thi statement will also assist later in get the sampl admit in court
patient dictat to the suspect the same text or text contain the same letter and
combin of letter of the same type hand print handwritten capit or small letter
as the question write on the evid document do not assist the suspect in the
spell of word punctuat or grammar
obtain on sampl at a time on separ sheet or form onc a sampl is complet
remov it from the suspect sight befor the next sampl is prepar to ensur that the
suspect rang of normal variat is displai sever sampl of each text should
be obtain
be alert for ani attempt to disguis normal write such as exagger slant veri rapid
write veri slow and awkward write unusu larg or small write or bizarr letter
format see the natur variat disguis distort and forgeri section
typewrit and comput printer
typewrit prepar on tradit typebarsegmentshift typewrit both manual and
electr can often be posit identifi by expert from mechan defect uniqu to each
machin typewritten text prepar on latermodel typewrit equip with
interchang daisi wheel ball or baskettyp element ar difficult if not imposs to
identifi computer dot matrix ink jet thermal transfer or laser electrostat printer
ar rare identifi usual the onli expert determin concern these typewrit
and printer ar that the same typefac design and size font letter space and print
process were us
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3115
typewrit ribbon could be evid
oldstyl fabric typewrit ribbon ar rare of ani valu in determin whether a particular
typewrit wa us to prepar a question document fortun for investig most
modern manual and electr typewrit regardless of whether typebar or singl element ar
equip with singleus ribbon if it is suspect that an evid document wa recent
prepar on such a machin remov and examin of the ribbon might reveal the text of
the document expert examin of the ribbon might posit prove that the typewrit
and ribbon were us to produc the document
avoid take unnecessari sampl
fraud examin do not have to be expert to make preliminari elimin of some
suspect typewrit and narrow down the number of typewrit thei might have to take
sampl from although there ar hundr of differ font in us on comput printer
tradit manual and some electron typewrit might be elimin by differ in
their typefac design
although font might appear to be veri similar the observ fraud examin can
differenti between them by concentr on those letter and numer that most often
differ note first whether the letter style on the evid document and the typewrit ar
serif the letter have small horizont bar at the top and bottom of the letter like littl feet
or san serif no small bar if thei differ then the typewrit is not the on us next look
at the shape of the letter and numer pai particular attent to the small letter f g r t
and w and the numer 2 3 4 and 5 if ani of those differ in shape then the typewrit is
not the on us
take typewrit sampl
alwai remov retain and preserv the origin ribbon first befor take ani sampl
place it in a seal envelop and initi it for later identif after remov and
preserv the origin ribbon replac it with a new on and type the sampl in the same
text as the question document repeat portion of the question text sever time after
take sampl with a ribbon shift the ribbon adjust to the stencil posit
insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directli onto the carbon
paper us it as a ribbon to make type text on the sheet of paper again type the
question text sever time as each specimen is made record the brand name model and
serial number of the typewrit us and initi and date each sheet place the ribbon and
analyz document investig
3116 2011 fraud examin manual
specimen in a plastic or heavi envelop and submit them to the expert along with the
question evid document in separ envelop
photocopi
increasingli photocopi ar retain as origin record of document particularli in
outgo correspond file and can becom the onli evid of a document becaus
the origin document cannot be locat or in some case cannot be releas such as in the
case of offici public record
fraud examin and other investig sometim submit a copi of a document for
examin becaus thei do not wish to part with the origin as a result the document
examin will probabl not be abl to determin featur and reach conclus that could
have been made from the origin document when at all possibl the fraud examin
should obtain the origin document for the document examin and should not submit
a copi
identifi the sourc of a photocopi
photocopi can be the actual origin evid in the case of
anonym letter
unauthor leak of inform in the fo rm of copi of letter memoranda file
and other record
copi made to conceal forgeri or to insert or manipul text
spuriou disinform dissemin of phoni offici document
locat the sourc of a copi can be crucial in some investig it is sometim possibl
to determin what kind of copier wa us to produc the copi in question some type of
machin leav minut mark indent and other featur on the copi that will assist
the expert in determin the brand and model of the machin us it is also possibl to
identifi the particular machin us by examin the pattern of uniqu and identifi
trash mark speck spot streak edg mark etc it leav on copi and compar
them with copi from a known machin the fraud examin should be awar howev
that some of these mark have perman while other ar transient and temporari
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3117
perman trash mark
these uniqu identifi mark on copi ar usual caus by accident deep
scratch and imperfect in the copier glass surfac or document cover in the print
element surfac or other perman machin part that ar not readili replac or chang
dure servic of the machin these mark can be reproduc on copi for year until
the machin is repair or the part replac
transient trash mark
trash mark ar uniqu identifi mark on copi thei ar usual caus by dirt
smudg or small bit of foreign matter on or in machin surfac that will appear until the
machin is clean or servic these mark prove not onli that a particular machin wa
us to produc the copi but that document that share the same transient trash mark
might have been produc at approxim the same time thi is on of sever wai to
determin when a document wa prepar
take photocopi sampl
first without place ani document in the machin make six blank copi as the
machin produc each copi remov it turn it over and on the revers side initi and
number each copi in the same sequenc thei were produc by the machin these copi will
reproduc all trash mark made by the machin includ the entir document cover glass
surfac and intern print element surfac six sampl copi ar need sinc differ
model of machin have vari print element surfac size usual rang in size from
on to three sheet impress befor repeat on the same area of the surfac
second place a ruler or other calibr measur devic on the glass document surfac
close the cover and make six copi these copi will permit a determin of the
standard amount of reduct or enlarg the machin make when in the actual size
or onetoon mode if the machin requir document to be fed into it rather than have
a glass document surfac us ani sampl document avail as an origin and includ
that sampl document along with the copi of it on the revers of each copi initi and
number the copi in the same sequenc thei were produc by the machin as outlin in
the first step
third place a sampl document contain both typewritten and handwritten text on the
glass document surfac in the standard posit close the document cover and again print
analyz document investig
3118 2011 fraud examin manual
six copi initi and number as previous direct also includ the sampl
document with the copi sampl
place all of the sampl copi and sampl document into a larg sturdi paper or cardboard
envelop or folder do not us a plastic envelop on which you have previous note the
make model and locat of the machin initi date and seal the envelop and submit it
to the document examin along with the question evid document
date a document
is the document genuin or a backdat fabric thi question sometim aris dure
fraud inquiri and the answer can be determin through scientif examin of the
document by forens expert the fraud examin should be alert for thi type of fraud and
have some knowledg of what can be done as well as an awar of the limit
the alibi document
these document suddenli appear from out of nowher and often late in the cours of
an investig inquiri or trial thei ar alwai favor to the suspect and refut
previous develop inform or evid that is damag to the suspect mani prove
to be fabric
the long lost will
the sudden appear of a new will that postdat and supersed all other will is all too
common amazingli it often leav larg portion of the estat to the person who found it
and onli a photocopi can be locat mani prove to have been fabric us the cutandpast
method although not involv photocopi the much public fabric and
forg mormon will of howard hugh in the mid1970 is a prime exampl
valuabl histor and collect document
the product of phoni histor and collect document artwork and antiqu ha
been a lucr field for fraud artist for hundr of year and continu to the present
recent major fraud involv loss of million of dollar have involv such divers phoni
document as the fake hitler diari counterfeit rare basebal card forg autograph
of histor figur and celebr fake old treati with nativ american tribe newli
discov handwritten rough draft of the us declar of independ lincoln
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3119
gettysburg address and other famou histor document sever counterfeit and
forg mormon document counterfeit first edit book and mani other
anachron in documentari materi
exposur of fraudul histor document often reli upon the combin skill of
investig histor expert scientif laboratori and forens document examin
accur handwrit comparison ar rare possibl in the absenc of adequ
contemporan genuin write of the purport author instead examin ar made
of the materi us to produc the document such as paper ink print adhes and
seal bind and cover detect of backdat contemporari document usual reli
upon dilig investig and the techniqu of the forens document examin
when adequ handwrit or signatur sampl ar avail expert comparison can
expos the forgeri otherwis in order to disprov the purport date of the document
analys of the materi might prove that thei did not exist at the time the document wa
supposedli prepar expert examin of contemporari documentari materi includ
ink analys and comparison with a librari of ink standard maintain by the us
secret servic laboratori in washington dc to determin the kind of ink and when it
wa first manufactur
examin of typewrit and comparison with collect of typewrit refer
standard maintain by forens laboratori to determin the kind of typewrit that
wa us and when the typewrit wa first manufactur
examin of paper especi watermark paper and search of refer
materi to determin who manufactur the paper and when it wa first produc
examin of photocopi and fax copi and comparison with refer standard
to determin what kind of machin wa us and when those machin were first
produc
comparison of question photocopi with photocopi known to have been
produc on a particular machin on a particular date can prove or disprov the date of
the question copi
fraud examin should note that there ar current no method for accur determin
how long ink typewrit or photocopierprint toner have been on paper
analyz document investig
3120 2011 fraud examin manual
indent write
fraud examin should be alert for the presenc of incrimin indent write or the
absenc of logic indent both of which can be valuabl in prove fraud in some
situat document ar routin kept in multiplepag set such as in legal form
multiplecopi invoic notebook tablet pad clipboard and so on in these situat
the write on on sheet should correspond to indent on the follow sheet the
absenc of correspond indent write on the follow sheet or the presenc of
indent write on on sheet that do not correspond with the text of the write on the
preced sheet could provid proof that page have been remov and substitut
develop indent write
never attempt to develop indent write by shade or scratch on the surfac of a
sheet of paper with a pencil thi will reveal deep indent but it will not reveal the faint
on and will perman prevent expert examin from develop them other type
of technic examin might also be prevent by thi defac of the document
some indent write can be visual by take the document to an area with subdu
overhead light place the document on a flat surfac and shine a bright beam of light
from a smallbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp across the paper surfac at a low
obliqu angl or parallel to the surfac sinc shadow in the indent will onli show at
right angl to the beam of light it will be necessari to move the light around in sever
posit and note the chang shadow as thei form the text of the indent
document expert us special light and photograph techniqu and sensit
instrument such as the electrostat detect apparatu esda to detect and perman
record extrem faint indent write that cannot be visual by the obliquelight
method
counterfeit print document
most document that have monetari valu such as currenc bank check travel check
monei order bearer bond postag stamp gift certif or lotteri ticket have all been
counterfeit at on time or anoth ident document ar also often counterfeit for
exampl passport birth certif driver licens and govern and commerci
employe ident card other counterfeit document includ commerci product label
busi stationeri and form busi logo motor vehicl titl and registr form
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3121
and safeti inspect sticker despit most prevent measur if a document ha ani
valu it can be and probabl ha been counterfeit counterfeit ha becom big
busi especi in some thirdworld countri where the latest develop in print
technolog ar be us to produc larg quantiti of highqual counterfeit document
and knockoff phoni product in violat of intern copyright and trademark law
counterfeit method
the dai of oldstyl counterfeit who were skill artisan who carefulli etch
counterfeit print plate ar over todai most counterfeit document ar prepar by
variou photoreproduct process such as the photooffset print process
lithographi and flexographi which us rubber print plate these process
begin with the photograph reproduct of a genuin document the photograph
neg ar then carefulli retouch to remov the filledin text serial number and other
distinguish featur that appear on the genuin document print plate ar then
made from the retouch neg and counterfeit copi ar print from the plate
rapidli advanc technolog now allow larcen novic with no commerci print
experi to us sophist computer scanner comput graphic softwar
multicolor comput printer and fullcolor photocopi machin to produc rel highqual
counterfeit document
detect counterfeit
mani counterfeit can be detect by make a sidebysid comparison with a
correspond genuin document be alert for differ version or form revis look for
subtl differ in ink color and brillianc differ type of paper substrat the us of
differ typestyl and type size font and evid of the retouch the text on the
genuin document us in the reproduct the retouch will be most evid in area
where text serial number and the like ar superimpos on a background design especi
if thei ar print in black ink
when furnish with genuin document for comparison with suspect counterfeit
forens document examin can also make expert differenti between the print
process ink formul and paper substrat us in some instanc it ha been
possibl for the expert to reconstruct portion of the filledin text or serial number that
appear on the genuin document but were remov in the retouch process in thi
fashion the specif origin document us by the counterfeit can sometim be
analyz document investig
3122 2011 fraud examin manual
determin by trace the histori of the document ownership the counterfeit can be
locat and identifi treatment of the origin genuin document for latent
fingerprint might posit identifi the counterfeit and other peopl who handl the
genuin document
fingerprint
latent nonvis print ar left on surfac by the bodi oil salt and amino acid
cling to or exud by friction ridg in the skin on finger palm of the hand and sole
of the feet and ar uniqu person identifi latent print might also be deposit on
surfac by hand finger and bare feet through the transfer of oil and greas patent
visibl print ar sometim deposit on surfac by hand finger and bare feet through
the transfer of materi such as blood paint soot and soil
latent print absorb into protect porou sur face such as paper in file or page in
book have been known to surviv for decad and still be identifi after chemic
develop howev latent fingerprint on hard nonpor surfac can be destroi or
deterior rapidli if handl not protect fr om the environ or expos to high
temperatur humid or water
fraud examin should wear protect glove or carefulli us tweezer when handl
latent fingerprint evid to avoid smudg and contamin tweezer should not be
us on document if indent write or photocopi examin ar plan
fingerprint on paper or other absorb porou surfac
fraud examin should never try to develop latent fingerprint that have been absorb into
paper or other porou materi by dust with fingerprint powder or ani other mean
such effort will not onli be unsuccess but will prevent addit examin preserv
the evid by place the item into a plastic bag or cellophan protector label the
contain with the examin initi the date and an identifi exhibit number expert
will us variou method on these materi includ iodin fume and brush or
sprai silver nitrat solut or ninhydrin sprai which react with the bodi chemic and
other substanc in the latent print that have soak into the absorb surfac some of
these method will perman discolor a document
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3123
fingerprint on hard nonpor surfac
item with hard nonpor surfac such as plastic metal and glass can be dust for the
presenc of latent fingerprint left on their surfac special fingerprint dust powder and
lift materi ar avail from law enforc supplier the dry powder toner us
in some photocopi machin ha also been us successfulli for fingerprint dust
after dust the surfac and locat a suspect print or partial print blow or gentli brush
off the excess powder remov the develop print with adhes lift tape and place the
tape on an index card that contrast in color with the dust powder us mark the card
with initi the date an identifi exhibit number and where the print wa found
some latent print on nonpor surfac might not be develop by the dust method
if possibl rather than dust the item the fraud examin should retain it place it in a
protect contain initi date and label the contain with an identifi exhibit number
and submit it to a fingerprint expert for process rather than dust fingerprint expert
might us cyanoacryl superglu fume or a laser to successfulli develop and
photograph the latent print on some materi such as black plastic bag
fingerprint comparison standard
the fingerprint of million of peopl ar on record in repositori of fingerprint card
maintain by law enforc agenc throughout the world these card contain the
ink fingerprint of peopl who have been arrest serv in the militari appli for
employ at variou level of govern and volunt their fingerprint to assist in
person identif in the event of their death mani of these fingerprint databas have
been computer and ar link by network howev million of peopl do not fit in
ani of these categori and have never been fingerprint
if a suspect ha never been fingerprint or refus to voluntarili furnish ink print
sampl it might be necessari for the fraud examin to obtain a legal court order direct
the suspect to furnish ink print for identif purpos even though the evid
item might have been handl by sever peopl thei might still bear latent print of the
guilti parti if the item have been inadvert handl by other known peopl includ
the fraud examin then ink print of all of those peopl should also be obtain and
submit to the fingerprint expert along with the evid item and the ink print
of suspect
analyz document investig
3124 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc for expert document examin
law enforc laboratori
in case where crimin prosecut ar like there ar excel forens laboratori
avail through law enforc agenc at the local state and nation level of the
crimin justic system
forens document expert in privat practic
when an expert servic ar need a fraud examin can identifi and locat fulli
qualifi courtcertifi expert forens document examin avail in a particular
geograph area by contact the follow organ
american board of forens document examin
7887 san felip suit 122
houston texa 77063
713 7849537
wwwabfdeorg
american academi of forens scienc
410 north 21st street
colorado spring colorado 809042798
719 6361100
wwwaafsorg
graphologist graphoanalyst
grapholog graphoanalysi ha been describ as a pseudosci whose practition
have the purport abil to determin a person charact moral trait person and
mental state base upon an analysi of that person handwrit grapholog is often
erron confus with forens document examin especi by the media fraud
examin should be awar that some peopl who practic grapholog analys might have
littl academ and scientif train thei might be selftaught or graduat of a
correspond cours sinc a conclus accuraci level ha not been establish for those
examin expert testimoni by graphologist is often reject by the court fraud
examin should be cautiou in reli on handwrit identif made by some of
these handwrit expert
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3201
