2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Obtaining Documentary Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Obtaining Documentary Evidence 
Documentary evidence may be obtained in a number of ways. If both parties agree, it is 
possible to obtain evidence by consent. This is the preferred method. Consent can be oral or 
written. When information is obtained from possible adverse witnesses, or the target of the 
examination, it is recommended that the consent be in writing. Sample forms are contained 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in the Appendix to the “Report Writing” chapter. In many cases, however, the investigator 
will not wish to alert the suspect to his intentions and other routes must be taken.  
 
If the evidence is owned by and in the control of the party that requests the information 
(e.g., in an employee’s desk drawers at the office), then the investigator is usually able to 
obtain the documents as required.  
 
If, however, evidence is held by other parties or in uncontrolled locations, specific legal 
action is required. Most often, the legal process used takes the form of a subpoena or other 
court order to produce the documents and records (including electronic records). Other 
forms of court orders can be used to obtain witness evidence and statements.  
  
Under no circumstances should the investigator attempt to obtain documents by other 
means, as this can lead to charges of theft, trespass, and other sanctions. Further details are 
provided in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
Types of Evidence 
There are two basic types of admissible evidence: direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence  
shows prima facie the facts at issue; it proves the fact directly. What constitutes direct 
evidence depends on the factors involved. For example, in the Linda Reed Collins case 
involving possible kickbacks, which is included in the Appendix to this section, direct 
evidence might be a check from the vendor to her. 
 
Circumstantial evidence  is that which indirectly shows culpability. In the case of a kickback 
allegation against Collins, cash deposits of unknown origin deposited to her account around 
the time of the suspect transaction could be considered circumstantial evidence.  
 
Organization of Evidence 
Keeping track of the amount of paper generated is one of the biggest problems in fraud 
cases. It is essential that documents obtained be properly organized early on in an 
examination, and that they be continuously reorganized as the case progresses. Remember, it 
is usually difficult to ascertain the relevance of the evidence early in the case. Good 
organization in complex cases includes the following: 
• Segregating documents by either witness or transaction. In the first method, the 
examiner takes the list of names, whether employee, associate, or witness, and begins 
assembling collected documents by witness. Alternatively, the fraud examiner might find 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.103 
it easier to organize the information by grouping evidence of the same or similar 
transactions together. Chronological organization, however, is the least preferred 
method. 
• Making a key document file — a separate file that contains copies of certain important pieces 
of information for quick access — for easy access to the most relevant documents. 
Periodically review the key documents. Move the less important documents to backup 
files and keep only the most relevant documents in the main file. 
• Establish a database early if there is a large amount of information to process. This 
database can be manual or computerized and accessed by keywords or Bates Stamp 
numbering. The database should include, at a minimum, the date of the document, the 
individual from whom the document was obtained, the date obtained, a brief 
description, and the subject to whom the document pertains. 
 
Chronologies 
A chronology of events should be commenced early in the case. The purpose of maintaining 
a chronology is to establish the chain of events leading to the proof. The chronology might 
or might not be made a part of the formal report; at a minimum, it can be used for analysis 
of the case and placed in a working paper binder. Keep the chronology brief and include 
only information necessary to prove the case. By making the chronology too detailed, you 
defeat its purpose. The chronology should be revised as necessary, adding new information 
and deleting  
the irrelevant. 
 
To-Do Lists 
Another indispensable aid is the to-do list. The list, which must be updated frequently, 
should be kept in a stenographer’s pad or other permanent ring binder to allow a cumulative 
record. In a very complex case, the list can be broken into long- and short-term objectives: 
that which must be done eventually (e.g., prove elements of a particular count), and that 
which should be done tomorrow (e.g., conduct an interview or draft a subpoena). However 
organized, some sort of list must be kept, otherwise important points will be forgotten in the 
lengthy case. A sample checklist is included in the “Report Writing” chapter. 
 
 



:


obtain documentari evid
documentari evid mai be obtain in a number of wai if both parti agre it is
possibl to obtain evid by consent thi is the prefer method consent can be oral or
written when inform is obtain from possibl advers wit or the target of the
examin it is recommend that the consent be in write sampl form ar contain
analyz document investig
3102 2011 fraud examin manual
in the appendix to the report write chapter in mani case howev the investig
will not wish to alert the suspect to hi intent and other rout must be taken
if the evid is own by and in the control of the parti that request the inform
eg in an employe desk drawer at the offic then the investig is usual abl to
obtain the document as requir
if howev evid is held by other parti or in uncontrol locat specif legal
action is requir most often the legal process us take the form of a subpoena or other
court order to produc the document and record includ electron record other
form of court order can be us to obtain wit evid and statement
under no circumst should the investig attempt to obtain document by other
mean as thi can lead to charg of theft trespass and other sanction further detail ar
provid in the law section of the fraud examin manual
type of evid
there ar two basic type of admiss evid direct or circumstanti direct evid
show prima faci the fact at issu it prove the fact directli what constitut direct
evid depend on the factor involv for exampl in the linda reed collin case
involv possibl kickback which is includ in the appendix to thi section direct
evid might be a check from the vendor to her
circumstanti evid is that which indirectli show culpabl in the case of a kickback
alleg against collin cash deposit of unknown origin deposit to her account around
the time of the suspect transact could be consid circumstanti evid
organ of evid
keep track of the amount of paper gener is on of the biggest problem in fraud
case it is essenti that document obtain be properli organ earli on in an
examin and that thei be continu reorgan as the case progress rememb it
is usual difficult to ascertain the relev of the evid earli in the case good
organ in complex case includ the follow
segreg document by either wit or transact in the first method the
examin take the list of name whether employe associ or wit and begin
assembl collect document by wit altern the fraud examin might find
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3103
it easier to organ the inform by group evid of the same or similar
transact togeth chronolog organ howev is the least prefer
method
make a kei document file a separ file that contain copi of certain import piec
of inform for quick access for easi access to the most relev document
period review the kei document move the less import document to backup
file and keep onli the most relev document in the main file
establish a databas earli if there is a larg amount of inform to process thi
databas can be manual or computer and access by keyword or bate stamp
number the databas should includ at a minimum the date of the document the
individu from whom the document wa obtain the date obtain a brief
descript and the subject to whom the document pertain
chronolog
a chronolog of event should be commenc earli in the case the purpos of maintain
a chronolog is to establish the chain of event lead to the proof the chronolog might
or might not be made a part of the formal report at a minimum it can be us for analysi
of the case and place in a work paper binder keep the chronolog brief and includ
onli inform necessari to prove the case by make the chronolog too detail you
defeat it purpos the chronolog should be revis as necessari ad new inform
and delet
the irrelev
todo list
anoth indispens aid is the todo list the list which must be updat frequent
should be kept in a stenograph pad or other perman ring binder to allow a cumul
record in a veri complex case the list can be broken into long and shortterm object
that which must be done eventu eg prove element of a particular count and that
which should be done tomorrow eg conduct an interview or draft a subpoena howev
organ some sort of list must be kept otherwis import point will be forgotten in the
lengthi case a sampl checklist is includ in the report write chapter
