2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Obtaining Documentary Evidence/Organization of Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Organization of Evidence 
Keeping track of the amount of paper generated is one of the biggest problems in fraud 
cases. It is essential that documents obtained be properly organized early on in an 
examination, and that they be continuously reorganized as the case progresses. Remember, it 
is usually difficult to ascertain the relevance of the evidence early in the case. Good 
organization in complex cases includes the following: 
• Segregating documents by either witness or transaction. In the first method, the 
examiner takes the list of names, whether employee, associate, or witness, and begins 
assembling collected documents by witness. Alternatively, the fraud examiner might find 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.103 
it easier to organize the information by grouping evidence of the same or similar 
transactions together. Chronological organization, however, is the least preferred 
method. 
• Making a key document file — a separate file that contains copies of certain important pieces 
of information for quick access — for easy access to the most relevant documents. 
Periodically review the key documents. Move the less important documents to backup 
files and keep only the most relevant documents in the main file. 
• Establish a database early if there is a large amount of information to process. This 
database can be manual or computerized and accessed by keywords or Bates Stamp 
numbering. The database should include, at a minimum, the date of the document, the 
individual from whom the document was obtained, the date obtained, a brief 
description, and the subject to whom the document pertains. 
 



:


organ of evid
keep track of the amount of paper gener is on of the biggest problem in fraud
case it is essenti that document obtain be properli organ earli on in an
examin and that thei be continu reorgan as the case progress rememb it
is usual difficult to ascertain the relev of the evid earli in the case good
organ in complex case includ the follow
segreg document by either wit or transact in the first method the
examin take the list of name whether employe associ or wit and begin
assembl collect document by wit altern the fraud examin might find
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3103
it easier to organ the inform by group evid of the same or similar
transact togeth chronolog organ howev is the least prefer
method
make a kei document file a separ file that contain copi of certain import piec
of inform for quick access for easi access to the most relev document
period review the kei document move the less import document to backup
file and keep onli the most relev document in the main file
establish a databas earli if there is a larg amount of inform to process thi
databas can be manual or computer and access by keyword or bate stamp
number the databas should includ at a minimum the date of the document the
individu from whom the document wa obtain the date obtain a brief
descript and the subject to whom the document pertain
