2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Handling Documents as Physical Evidence


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Handling Documents as Physical Evidence 
A document can be a piece of physical evidence and not just a source of information. As a 
piece of evidence it should be handled carefully and stored properly in a sealed, initialed, and 
dated paper folder or envelope to avoid damage or contamination. If necessary, make a 
working copy and preserve the original document for submission to a forensic document 
examiner. Most forensic examinations will require the original document, not a copy of it, 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
since most photocopies do not reproduce original writings, typewriting, or other features 
with sufficient clarity or detail to allow adequate examination. 
 
When initialing a document for future identification, do it in a non-critical area and use a 
different type of writing instrument than was used for the questioned writings on the 
document. The examiner should never write or make markings on the original document 
other than his unobtrusive initials for identification. Do not add new folds, staple it, place 
paper clips on it, crumple it, or do anything else that would affect or change its original 
condition. If stored in an envelope, be careful not to write on the envelope and cause 
indentations on the original document inside. Photocopies and laser-printed documents 
should always be stored in paper folders or envelopes, not transparent plastic envelopes, 
which can result in the copies sticking to the plastic and destroying some features of the 
document. 
 
Chain of Custody 
From the moment evidence is received, its chain of custody  must be maintained for it to be 
accepted by the court. This means that a record must be made when the item is received or 
when it leaves the care, custody, or control of the fraud examiner. This is best handled by a 
memorandum of interview with the custodian of the records when the evidence is received. 
The memorandum should state: 
• What items were received 
• When they were received 
• From whom they were received 
• Where they are maintained 
 
If the item is later turned over to someone else, a record of this should be made—preferably 
in memorandum form. All evidence received should be uniquely marked so that it can be 
identified later. The preferable way is to initial and date the item; however, this can pose 
problems in the case of original business records furnished voluntarily. For them, a small tick 
mark or other nondescript identifier can be used. If it is not practical to mark the original 
document, it should be placed in a sealed envelope, which should then be initialed and dated. 
 
Preserving for Fingerprint Examinations 
If fingerprint examinations are anticipated, use gloves to handle the documents (be careful if 
tweezers are used because they can leave indentations that might obscure faint indented 
writings or the identifiable indentations that are sometimes left by photocopy and fax 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.107 
machines). If you or other known people have inadvertently handled the documents with 
bare hands, your names should be provided to the fingerprint specialist. It might be 
necessary to provide the expert with sets of inked fingerprints of these people for 
elimination purposes. (See the “Fingerprints” section for additional information.) 
 
Charred or Partially Burned Documents 
These documents might contain valuable evidence if restored by experts, but they are very 
fragile and should be handled with extreme care. For proper preservation and storage, 
trained experts might use special polyester film sheets and envelopes, which are not readily 
available to the fraud examiner. The examiner can best preserve such evidence for 
submission to the forensic expert by using a sturdy crush-proof container into which he 
places layers of cotton (available in rolls at fabric and sewing materials shops). Carefully slide 
a sheet of paper or thin cardboard under the burned fragments, lift them and place them on 
the layers of cotton, then remove the paper used for lifting. Gently place additional layers of 
cotton over the fragments until the container is filled. Do not compress the cotton. Seal the 
container, initial and date it, add an identifying contents label or exhibit number, and clearly 
write or stamp “Fragile” on the container. 
 
Recognizing Phony Documents 
Forensic document examiners apply scientific methods and use a variety of technical 
instruments in conducting examinations and comparisons of documents. Individual minute 
characteristics in handwriting and typewriting are examined and compared with genuine 
comparison standards. Detailed analyses are made of document features for proof of 
changes or modifications. Instruments used include sensitive measuring devices, low-power 
magnifying glasses, several types of microscopes, ultraviolet and infrared lighting, optical 
filters, micro and macro photography, computerized image-enhancement systems, sensitive 
instruments to detect faint indented writings, and numerous others. Various chemical 
analyses are also conducted. 
 
Although not expected to be a documents expert, an observant fraud examiner might be 
able to recognize some features of documents that could alert him to their fraudulent nature: 
• Signature forgeries  might be recognized by irregularities noticeable in the written letters 
and/or by their differences in size from a genuine signature. A side-by-side comparison 
with a genuine signature might reveal the differences. However, remember that advanced 
age, poor health, temporary injury, and the use of drugs and alcohol can result in similar 
discrepancies and might mislead the examiner. Genuine comparison samples should be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtained, and a forensic document examiner consulted to make an expert determination. 
(See the “How to Obtain Handwriting Samples” section.) 
• Substituted pages  in multiple-page documents, such as contracts and wills, can often be 
spotted by holding each page in front of a bright light. Differences in the whiteness, 
density, thickness, opacity, and paper-fiber patterns of the substituted sheets might be 
apparent. 
• Some ink differences, alterations, erasures, and obliterations are also revealed by holding the 
paper in front of a bright light or holding a light over the writings at different angles and 
observing differences in the color and reflectivity of the inks or disturbances to the paper 
surface. 
• Counterfeited printed documents, such as checks, stock and bond certificates, business forms 
and stationery, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and other identification documents, are 
sometimes readily disclosed by side-by-side comparisons with corresponding genuine 
documents. Be alert for the use of incorrect or different versions or form revisions of 
the documents. For forensic examinations, it will be necessary to obtain and furnish 
genuine comparison samples of the printed documents to the document examiner. (See 
the “Counterfeit Printed Documents” section.) 
• Suspicious indented writings might be revealed by reducing the light in the room and holding 
a bright beam of light (a narrow-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp will do the 
job) low and parallel to the page surface. (See the “Indented Writings” section.) 
 
 



:


handl document as physic evid
a document can be a piec of physic evid and not just a sourc of inform as a
piec of evid it should be handl carefulli and store properli in a seal initi and
date paper folder or envelop to avoid damag or contamin if necessari make a
work copi and preserv the origin document for submiss to a forens document
examin most forens examin will requir the origin document not a copi of it
analyz document investig
3106 2011 fraud examin manual
sinc most photocopi do not reproduc origin write typewrit or other featur
with suffici clariti or detail to allow adequ examin
when initi a document for futur identif do it in a noncrit area and us a
differ type of write instrument than wa us for the question write on the
document the examin should never write or make mark on the origin document
other than hi unobtrus initi for identif do not add new fold stapl it place
paper clip on it crumpl it or do anyth els that would affect or chang it origin
condit if store in an envelop be care not to write on the envelop and caus
indent on the origin document insid photocopi and laserprint document
should alwai be store in paper folder or envelop not transpar plastic envelop
which can result in the copi stick to the plastic and destroi some featur of the
document
chain of custodi
from the moment evid is receiv it chain of custodi must be maintain for it to be
accept by the court thi mean that a record must be made when the item is receiv or
when it leav the care custodi or control of the fraud examin thi is best handl by a
memorandum of interview with the custodian of the record when the evid is receiv
the memorandum should state
what item were receiv
when thei were receiv
from whom thei were receiv
where thei ar maintain
if the item is later turn over to someon els a record of thi should be madeprefer
in memorandum form all evid receiv should be uniqu mark so that it can be
identifi later the prefer wai is to initi and date the item howev thi can pose
problem in the case of origin busi record furnish voluntarili for them a small tick
mark or other nondescript identifi can be us if it is not practic to mark the origin
document it should be place in a seal envelop which should then be initi and date
preserv for fingerprint examin
if fingerprint examin ar anticip us glove to handl the document be care if
tweezer ar us becaus thei can leav indent that might obscur faint indent
write or the identifi indent that ar sometim left by photocopi and fax
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3107
machin if you or other known peopl have inadvert handl the document with
bare hand your name should be provid to the fingerprint specialist it might be
necessari to provid the expert with set of ink fingerprint of these peopl for
elimin purpos see the fingerprint section for addit inform
char or partial burn document
these document might contain valuabl evid if restor by expert but thei ar veri
fragil and should be handl with extrem care for proper preserv and storag
train expert might us special polyest film sheet and envelop which ar not readili
avail to the fraud examin the examin can best preserv such evid for
submiss to the forens expert by us a sturdi crushproof contain into which he
place layer of cotton avail in roll at fabric and sew materi shop carefulli slide
a sheet of paper or thin cardboard under the burn fragment lift them and place them on
the layer of cotton then remov the paper us for lift gentli place addit layer of
cotton over the fragment until the contain is fill do not compress the cotton seal the
contain initi and date it add an identifi content label or exhibit number and clearli
write or stamp fragil on the contain
recogn phoni document
forens document examin appli scientif method and us a varieti of technic
instrument in conduct examin and comparison of document individu minut
characterist in handwrit and typewrit ar examin and compar with genuin
comparison standard detail analys ar made of document featur for proof of
chang or modif instrument us includ sensit measur devic lowpow
magnifi glass sever type of microscop ultraviolet and infrar light optic
filter micro and macro photographi computer imageenhanc system sensit
instrument to detect faint indent write and numer other variou chemic
analys ar also conduct
although not expect to be a document expert an observ fraud examin might be
abl to recogn some featur of document that could alert him to their fraudul natur
signatur forgeri might be recogn by irregular notic in the written letter
andor by their differ in size from a genuin signatur a sidebysid comparison
with a genuin signatur might reveal the differ howev rememb that advanc
ag poor health temporari injuri and the us of drug and alcohol can result in similar
discrep and might mislead the examin genuin comparison sampl should be
analyz document investig
3108 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain and a forens document examin consult to make an expert determin
see the how to obtain handwrit sampl section
substitut page in multiplepag document such as contract and will can often be
spot by hold each page in front of a bright light differ in the white
densiti thick opac and paperfib pattern of the substitut sheet might be
appar
some ink differ alter erasur and obliter ar also reveal by hold the
paper in front of a bright light or hold a light over the write at differ angl and
observ differ in the color and reflect of the ink or disturb to the paper
surfac
counterfeit print document such as check stock and bond certif busi form
and stationeri birth certif driver licens and other identif document ar
sometim readili disclos by sidebysid comparison with correspond genuin
document be alert for the us of incorrect or differ version or form revis of
the document for forens examin it will be necessari to obtain and furnish
genuin comparison sampl of the print document to the document examin see
the counterfeit print document section
suspici indent write might be reveal by reduc the light in the room and hold
a bright beam of light a narrowbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp will do the
job low and parallel to the page surfac see the indent write section
