2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Identifying Writings


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Identifying Writings 
The development of a person’s handwriting usually begins at an early age as part of his 
formal education. So-called copy-book styles are taught, and the students are instructed 
through exercises to emulate as nearly as possible those letter formations. However, from 
the very beginning, the students’ writing skills vary considerably due to their differing 
physical and mental capabilities. These differences between individuals increase with age; 
physical development; and the acquisition of skills, differing aesthetic values, differences in 
education, and differences in the personal and professional usage of writing. As a result, each 
person’s writings contain a unique and identifiable combination of acquired individual 
personal characteristics and shared “class” characteristics. Forensic document examiners are 
trained and experienced in examining and comparing writings and assessing this combination 
of individual and class characteristics in making expert determinations of identity or  
non-identity. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.109 
Class Characteristics 
Fraud examiners should not be misled in developing suspects by mistaking similar class 
characteristics in different writing samples. Samples that seem to look alike are not necessarily 
from the same individual. The writings of some people might share superficial similarities in 
appearance and style and look the same to the layman when, in fact, they are very different. 
Forensic document examiners can correct this mistake. 
 
Copy-Book Styles  
Some of a writer’s letter shapes, handwritings tyle, and other characteristics might be shared 
by other writers because they were taught the same original copy-book system. In the United 
States, different states and different school districts within the states teach several different 
copy-book systems. Internationally, different systems are also taught. Writers might retain 
remnants of the system they learned as children. As an example, second-language writings of 
people taught in a Cyrillic (Russian) alphabet style will be influenced by Cyrillic letter styles 
and might contain some similarities. As another example, the hand printing and numeral 
styles taught to draftsmen, architects, and engineers might result in apparent similarities in 
the hand printing of people trained in those professions. 
 
“Copycat” Styles  
Some writers, especially adolescents, the young, and the easily influenced, might adopt the 
general handwriting style or some individual letter designs of a respected teacher or parent, 
or one shared by their peers. An example is the exaggerated rounded letter forms and 
circular “i” dots and periods that form the so-called bubble writings of some adolescent 
females. This style is usually abandoned as the person matures.  
 
Natural Variations, Disguise, Distortions, and Forgeries 
Variations  
No one signs his signature or writes exactly the same way twice because writing is a human 
act of coordinated mental and muscular activity, not the precise, repetitive action of a 
machine. However, each writer has his own fairly specific range of natural variation. Several 
examples of writing are necessary for a forensic document examiner to establish if a 
questioned writing is, or is not, within the range of natural variation of a particular writer. If 
fraud examiners find two signatures that are exactly alike, then at least one is a forgery, 
probably a tracing.  
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Disguise  
Disguise is the conscious, intentional effort by a person to change or conceal his normal 
writings. Disguise is attempted in an effort to prepare writings that can later be disclaimed or 
that the writer hopes will be anonymous and cannot be traced to the source. The success of 
an attempt to disguise writings depends on the writer’s skill and knowledge of writings. Most 
attempts at disguise involve one or more of the following: change in slant, change in size, 
change in shapes of capital (upper-case) letters, changes in the shapes and sizes of loops in 
letters that contain them, use of bizarre letter designs, or block (squared) hand printing. Only 
rarely is the opposite, non-writing hand used. Fraud examiners should be aware that it is 
possible to successfully disguise writings to the point that they cannot be positively 
identified, even by experts.  This is especially true when only limited amounts of writings  
are involved. 
 
Distortions  
Distortions are unintentional changes to a person’s writings that are beyond his range of 
natural variation. Distortion can be caused by temporary impairment due to illness, injury to 
the writing hand or arm, substance abuse, extreme physical weakness, unusual writing 
environment, irregular or unusual writing surface, or unfamiliar writing materials, or might 
be permanent due to extreme age and feebleness. Fraud examiners should be aware that 
distortions in writings can, on occasion, be so severe that positive identifications of a 
person’s writings might not be possible, even by experts.  
 
Forgeries 
A forgery is defined as any writing prepared with the intent to deceive or defraud. Most 
forgeries are signatures. Forgery can be done by simulation, by tracing, or by freehand preparation.  
 
SIMULATED AND TRACED FORGERIES  
A simulated or traced forgery is a writing, usually a signature, prepared by carefully copying 
or tracing a model example of another person’s writings. Although identifiable as a forgery, a 
simulated or traced signature forgery often does not contain enough normal handwriting 
characteristics of the forger to permit expert identification. 
 
Remember, no one writes his signature exactly the same way twice. If two signatures look 
exactly alike, try superimposing the signature areas of the two documents by holding them in 
front of a bright light. If they precisely match, then one or both are traced forgeries. Be 
aware that in some instances it might be possible to locate the original document bearing the 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.111 
genuine signature that was traced. This regularly occurs in employee fraud and 
embezzlement cases in banks and other financial institutions where the account holder’s 
signature card on file served as the source for the tracing. If the forged signature(s) precisely 
superimposes over the genuine signature, then it is also likely that faint indentations might 
be present in the signature area of the original genuine document. Also, ink traces from the 
genuine signature might be transferred to the reverse side of the traced signature(s). Latent 
fingerprint treatment of the original source document might reveal the fingerprints of  
the suspect. 
  
FREEHAND FORGERIES  
A freehand forgery occurs when a writer signs the name of another person without knowing 
what the real person’s signature looks like. The writers of freehand forgeries can usually be 
identified by experts. 
 
AUTOFORGERIES  
The true-name signature of a person, prepared by him in a distorted or disguised fashion in 
order to later deny it and disclaim it as genuine. This attempt at fraud has occurred in falsely 
reported traveler’s check theft cases, in cases involving disputed home mortgage and other 
loan documents, credit card frauds, and others.  
 
 



:


identifi write
the develop of a person handwrit usual begin at an earli ag as part of hi
formal educ socal copybook style ar taught and the student ar instruct
through exercis to emul as nearli as possibl those letter format howev from
the veri begin the student write skill vari consider due to their differ
physic and mental capabl these differ between individu increas with ag
physic develop and the acquisit of skill differ aesthet valu differ in
educ and differ in the person and profession usag of write as a result each
person write contain a uniqu and identifi combin of acquir individu
person characterist and share class characterist forens document examin ar
train and experienc in examin and compar write and assess thi combin
of individu and class characterist in make expert determin of ident or
nonident
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3109
class characterist
fraud examin should not be misl in develop suspect by mistak similar class
characterist in differ write sampl sampl that seem to look alik ar not necessarili
from the same individu the write of some peopl might share superfici similar in
appear and style and look the same to the layman when in fact thei ar veri differ
forens document examin can correct thi mistak
copybook style
some of a writer letter shape handwrit tyle and other characterist might be share
by other writer becaus thei were taught the same origin copybook system in the unit
state differ state and differ school district within the state teach sever differ
copybook system internation differ system ar also taught writer might retain
remnant of the system thei learn as children as an exampl secondlanguag write of
peopl taught in a cyril russian alphabet style will be influenc by cyril letter style
and might contain some similar as anoth exampl the hand print and numer
style taught to draftsmen architect and engin might result in appar similar in
the hand print of peopl train in those profess
copycat style
some writer especi adolesc the young and the easili influenc might adopt the
gener handwrit style or some individu letter design of a respect teacher or parent
or on share by their peer an exampl is the exagger round letter form and
circular i dot and period that form the socal bubbl write of some adolesc
femal thi style is usual abandon as the person matur
natur variat disguis distort and forgeri
variat
no on sign hi signatur or write exactli the same wai twice becaus write is a human
act of coordin mental and muscular activ not the precis repetit action of a
machin howev each writer ha hi own fairli specif rang of natur variat sever
exampl of write ar necessari for a forens document examin to establish if a
question write is or is not within the rang of natur variat of a particular writer if
fraud examin find two signatur that ar exactli alik then at least on is a forgeri
probabl a trace
analyz document investig
3110 2011 fraud examin manual
disguis
disguis is the consciou intent effort by a person to chang or conceal hi normal
write disguis is attempt in an effort to prepar write that can later be disclaim or
that the writer hope will be anonym and cannot be trace to the sourc the success of
an attempt to disguis write depend on the writer skill and knowledg of write most
attempt at disguis involv on or more of the follow chang in slant chang in size
chang in shape of capit uppercas letter chang in the shape and size of loop in
letter that contain them us of bizarr letter design or block squar hand print onli
rare is the opposit nonwrit hand us fraud examin should be awar that it is
possibl to successfulli disguis write to the point that thei cannot be posit
identifi even by expert thi is especi true when onli limit amount of write
ar involv
distort
distort ar unintent chang to a person write that ar beyond hi rang of
natur variat distort can be caus by temporari impair due to ill injuri to
the write hand or arm substanc abus extrem physic weak unusu write
environ irregular or unusu write surfac or unfamiliar write materi or might
be perman due to extrem ag and feebl fraud examin should be awar that
distort in write can on occas be so sever that posit identif of a
person write might not be possibl even by expert
forgeri
a forgeri is defin as ani write prepar with the intent to deceiv or defraud most
forgeri ar signatur forgeri can be done by simul by trace or by freehand prepar
simul and trace forgeri
a simul or trace forgeri is a write usual a signatur prepar by carefulli copi
or trace a model exampl of anoth person write although identifi as a forgeri a
simul or trace signatur forgeri often doe not contain enough normal handwrit
characterist of the forger to permit expert identif
rememb no on write hi signatur exactli the same wai twice if two signatur look
exactli alik try superimpos the signatur area of the two document by hold them in
front of a bright light if thei precis match then on or both ar trace forgeri be
awar that in some instanc it might be possibl to locat the origin document bear the
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3111
genuin signatur that wa trace thi regularli occur in employe fraud and
embezzl case in bank and other financi institut where the account holder
signatur card on file serv as the sourc for the trace if the forg signatur precis
superimpos over the genuin signatur then it is also like that faint indent might
be present in the signatur area of the origin genuin document also ink trace from the
genuin signatur might be transfer to the revers side of the trace signatur latent
fingerprint treatment of the origin sourc document might reveal the fingerprint of
the suspect
freehand forgeri
a freehand forgeri occur when a writer sign the name of anoth person without know
what the real person signatur look like the writer of freehand forgeri can usual be
identifi by expert
autoforgeri
the truenam signatur of a person prepar by him in a distort or disguis fashion in
order to later deni it and disclaim it as genuin thi attempt at fraud ha occur in fals
report travel check theft case in case involv disput home mortgag and other
loan document credit card fraud and other
