2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Identifying Writings/Forgeries


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Forgeries 
A forgery is defined as any writing prepared with the intent to deceive or defraud. Most 
forgeries are signatures. Forgery can be done by simulation, by tracing, or by freehand preparation.  
 
SIMULATED AND TRACED FORGERIES  
A simulated or traced forgery is a writing, usually a signature, prepared by carefully copying 
or tracing a model example of another person’s writings. Although identifiable as a forgery, a 
simulated or traced signature forgery often does not contain enough normal handwriting 
characteristics of the forger to permit expert identification. 
 
Remember, no one writes his signature exactly the same way twice. If two signatures look 
exactly alike, try superimposing the signature areas of the two documents by holding them in 
front of a bright light. If they precisely match, then one or both are traced forgeries. Be 
aware that in some instances it might be possible to locate the original document bearing the 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.111 
genuine signature that was traced. This regularly occurs in employee fraud and 
embezzlement cases in banks and other financial institutions where the account holder’s 
signature card on file served as the source for the tracing. If the forged signature(s) precisely 
superimposes over the genuine signature, then it is also likely that faint indentations might 
be present in the signature area of the original genuine document. Also, ink traces from the 
genuine signature might be transferred to the reverse side of the traced signature(s). Latent 
fingerprint treatment of the original source document might reveal the fingerprints of  
the suspect. 
  
FREEHAND FORGERIES  
A freehand forgery occurs when a writer signs the name of another person without knowing 
what the real person’s signature looks like. The writers of freehand forgeries can usually be 
identified by experts. 
 
AUTOFORGERIES  
The true-name signature of a person, prepared by him in a distorted or disguised fashion in 
order to later deny it and disclaim it as genuine. This attempt at fraud has occurred in falsely 
reported traveler’s check theft cases, in cases involving disputed home mortgage and other 
loan documents, credit card frauds, and others.  
 
 



:


forgeri
a forgeri is defin as ani write prepar with the intent to deceiv or defraud most
forgeri ar signatur forgeri can be done by simul by trace or by freehand prepar
simul and trace forgeri
a simul or trace forgeri is a write usual a signatur prepar by carefulli copi
or trace a model exampl of anoth person write although identifi as a forgeri a
simul or trace signatur forgeri often doe not contain enough normal handwrit
characterist of the forger to permit expert identif
rememb no on write hi signatur exactli the same wai twice if two signatur look
exactli alik try superimpos the signatur area of the two document by hold them in
front of a bright light if thei precis match then on or both ar trace forgeri be
awar that in some instanc it might be possibl to locat the origin document bear the
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3111
genuin signatur that wa trace thi regularli occur in employe fraud and
embezzl case in bank and other financi institut where the account holder
signatur card on file serv as the sourc for the trace if the forg signatur precis
superimpos over the genuin signatur then it is also like that faint indent might
be present in the signatur area of the origin genuin document also ink trace from the
genuin signatur might be transfer to the revers side of the trace signatur latent
fingerprint treatment of the origin sourc document might reveal the fingerprint of
the suspect
freehand forgeri
a freehand forgeri occur when a writer sign the name of anoth person without know
what the real person signatur look like the writer of freehand forgeri can usual be
identifi by expert
autoforgeri
the truenam signatur of a person prepar by him in a distort or disguis fashion in
order to later deni it and disclaim it as genuin thi attempt at fraud ha occur in fals
report travel check theft case in case involv disput home mortgag and other
loan document credit card fraud and other
