2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/How to Obtain Handwriting Samples


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


How to Obtain Handwriting Samples 
Positive results from forensic handwriting examinations and comparisons often depend on 
how well the fraud examiner has assembled adequate handwriting and signature samples of 
the suspects for submission to the forensic expert. The samples must be comparable to the 
writings on the evidence documents. Hand printing cannot be compared with handwriting. 
Capital letters cannot be compared with small letters. The samples must contain the same 
letters and combinations of letters, whether undictated or dictated. For example: “John” 
cannot be compared with “Susan,” “hot” with “c old,” “black” with “white,” or “July” with 
“September.” 
  
Undictated Writing Samples 
Try to obtain samples of a suspect or victim’s signature or other writings that were not 
prepared by him specifically for comparison purposes, but that can be authenticated. Courts 
will accept as authentic comparison documents any writings that were witnessed by others. 
Also acceptable are documents that were created “in the normal course of business,” such as 
canceled checks; signed or written documents in employee personnel records; applications 
for employment, licenses, or home utilities installations; and many others. The fraud 
examiner should use personal experiences and knowledge of the suspect’s routine activities 
in locating sources for these types of samples. 
 
When the evidence documents include suspected forged signatures, several genuine samples 
of the forgery victim’s signature should be obtai ned for submission to the expert. If possible, 
include any documents bearing genuine signatures of the victim’s that the suspect might 
have had access to and that might have served as a model for tracing or simulation. 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.113 
 Undictated writing samples should: 
• Be as contemporaneous as possible to the date of the evidence documents; if the 
questioned writings were prepared in the 1970s, writings recently prepared by a suspect 
might not be adequate for comparisons. However, except for infirmity or extreme age, 
the writings of most adults usually do not change much except over long periods of time.  
• Consist of the same signature or words containing many of the same letters and 
combinations of letters as the questioned writings on the evidence documents. 
• Consist of the same type of writings as on the evidence documents, such as hand printed 
or handwritten, capital letters or small letters or a combination of both. 
• Consist, if possible, of the same kinds of writings. A person’s informal writings, such as 
hastily prepared signatures on credit card receipts, might be very different from more 
formal writings, such as a signature on a contract or other legal document. 
 
Dictated Writing Samples 
Try to obtain dictated samples of a suspect’s or victim’s signature or writings specifically for 
comparison purposes, either voluntarily or by obtaining a legal order. 
 
Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples by Court Order 
When obtaining a legal order for samples, the investigator and/or attorney should ensure 
that the order specifies that the samples should be provided in the writer’s normal 
handwriting and in sufficient quantity, text, and form, at the interviewer’s discretion, to 
permit a determination of identity or non-identity. A court order with these specifications 
will permit an inference of guilt, or might allow pursuit of contempt of court charges if the 
suspect refuses to comply or attempts to prevent identification by intentionally disguising his 
writings, limiting the amount of writings, or failing to follow the interviewer’s instructions 
and dictations. 
  
Preparation for Taking Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Since expert handwriting identifications can truly prove the case, adequate pre-interview 
preparation by the fraud examiner is essential. At the time of the interview session to obtain 
dictated writing samples, the investigator should have all of the proper writing materials and 
should have the original or copies of the evidence documents to serve as a guide for 
dictating the sample text. Do not rush through the interview. Take as much time as 
necessary. Take short comfort breaks if the suspect tires. Do not allow the suspect to see the 
evidence documents before or during the taking of the samples. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Directions for Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Dictated writing samples should be obtained by using the same types of materials as the 
evidence document: writing instrument (ball-point pen, fountain pen, pencil, etc.), paper 
(lined, unlined, size of sheet), and forms (check forms, business forms, etc.). For purposes of 
the samples, an investigator can use a genuine form of the same or similar kind, make many 
photocopies of it, and have the samples prepared on the blank copies. 
 
To help the suspect relax, begin by having him write miscellaneous innocuous text, such as 
his name, the date, and a statement as to the voluntary nature of the samples being prepared. 
This statement will also assist later in getting the samples admitted in court.  
 
Patiently dictate to the suspect the same text or text containing the same letters and 
combinations of letters of the same type (hand printed, handwritten, capital, or small letters) 
as the questioned writings on the evidence document. Do not assist the suspect in the 
spelling of words, punctuation, or grammar. 
 
Obtain one sample at a time on separate sheets or forms. Once a sample is complete, 
remove it from the suspect’s sight before the next sample is prepared. To ensure that the 
suspect’s range of normal variation is displayed, several samples of each text should  
be obtained.  
 
Be alert for any attempts to disguise normal writings, such as exaggerated slant, very rapid 
writing, very slow and awkward writing, unusually large or small writing, or bizarre letter 
formations. (See the “Natural Variation, Disguise, Distortion, and Forgeries” section.)  
 
 



:


how to obtain handwrit sampl
posit result from forens handwrit examin and comparison often depend on
how well the fraud examin ha assembl adequ handwrit and signatur sampl of
the suspect for submiss to the forens expert the sampl must be compar to the
write on the evid document hand print cannot be compar with handwrit
capit letter cannot be compar with small letter the sampl must contain the same
letter and combin of letter whether undict or dictat for exampl john
cannot be compar with susan hot with c old black with white or juli with
septemb
undict write sampl
try to obtain sampl of a suspect or victim signatur or other write that were not
prepar by him specif for comparison purpos but that can be authent court
will accept as authent comparison document ani write that were wit by other
also accept ar document that were creat in the normal cours of busi such as
cancel check sign or written document in employe personnel record applic
for employ licens or home util instal and mani other the fraud
examin should us person experi and knowledg of the suspect routin activ
in locat sourc for these type of sampl
when the evid document includ suspect forg signatur sever genuin sampl
of the forgeri victim signatur should be obtai ned for submiss to the expert if possibl
includ ani document bear genuin signatur of the victim that the suspect might
have had access to and that might have serv as a model for trace or simul
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3113
undict write sampl should
be as contemporan as possibl to the date of the evid document if the
question write were prepar in the 1970 write recent prepar by a suspect
might not be adequ for comparison howev except for infirm or extrem ag
the write of most adult usual do not chang much except over long period of time
consist of the same signatur or word contain mani of the same letter and
combin of letter as the question write on the evid document
consist of the same type of write as on the evid document such as hand print
or handwritten capit letter or small letter or a combin of both
consist if possibl of the same kind of write a person inform write such as
hastili prepar signatur on credit card receipt might be veri differ from more
formal write such as a signatur on a contract or other legal document
dictat write sampl
try to obtain dictat sampl of a suspect or victim signatur or write specif for
comparison purpos either voluntarili or by obtain a legal order
obtain dictat handwrit sampl by court order
when obtain a legal order for sampl the investig andor attornei should ensur
that the order specifi that the sampl should be provid in the writer normal
handwrit and in suffici quantiti text and form at the interview discret to
permit a determin of ident or nonident a court order with these specif
will permit an infer of guilt or might allow pursuit of contempt of court charg if the
suspect refus to compli or attempt to prevent identif by intention disguis hi
write limit the amount of write or fail to follow the interview instruct
and dictat
prepar for take dictat handwrit sampl
sinc expert handwrit identif can truli prove the case adequ preinterview
prepar by the fraud examin is essenti at the time of the interview session to obtain
dictat write sampl the investig should have all of the proper write materi and
should have the origin or copi of the evid document to serv as a guid for
dictat the sampl text do not rush through the interview take as much time as
necessari take short comfort break if the suspect tire do not allow the suspect to see the
evid document befor or dure the take of the sampl
analyz document investig
3114 2011 fraud examin manual
direct for obtain dictat handwrit sampl
dictat write sampl should be obtain by us the same type of materi as the
evid document write instrument ballpoint pen fountain pen pencil etc paper
line unlin size of sheet and form check form busi form etc for purpos of
the sampl an investig can us a genuin form of the same or similar kind make mani
photocopi of it and have the sampl prepar on the blank copi
to help the suspect relax begin by have him write miscellan innocu text such as
hi name the date and a statement as to the voluntari natur of the sampl be prepar
thi statement will also assist later in get the sampl admit in court
patient dictat to the suspect the same text or text contain the same letter and
combin of letter of the same type hand print handwritten capit or small letter
as the question write on the evid document do not assist the suspect in the
spell of word punctuat or grammar
obtain on sampl at a time on separ sheet or form onc a sampl is complet
remov it from the suspect sight befor the next sampl is prepar to ensur that the
suspect rang of normal variat is displai sever sampl of each text should
be obtain
be alert for ani attempt to disguis normal write such as exagger slant veri rapid
write veri slow and awkward write unusu larg or small write or bizarr letter
format see the natur variat disguis distort and forgeri section
