2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Typewriters and Computer Printers


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Typewriters and Computer Printers 
Typewriting prepared on traditional typebar/segment-shift typewriters, both manual and 
electric, can often be positively identified by experts from mechanical defects unique to each 
machine. Typewritten texts prepared on later-model typewriters equipped with 
interchangeable daisy wheel, ball, or basket-type elements are difficult, if not impossible to 
identify. Computerized dot matrix, ink jet, thermal transfer, or laser (electrostatic) printers 
are rarely identifiable. Usually, the only expert determinations concerning these typewriters 
and printers are that the same typeface design and size (font), letter spacing, and print 
process were used. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.115 
Typewriter Ribbons Could Be Evidence 
Old-style fabric typewriter ribbons are rarely of any value in determining whether a particular 
typewriter was used to prepare a questioned document. Fortunately for investigators, most 
modern manual and electric typewriters, regardless of whether typebar or single element, are 
equipped with single-use ribbons. If it is suspected that an evidence document was recently 
prepared on such a machine, removal and examination of the ribbon might reveal the text of 
the document. Expert examination of the ribbon might positively prove that the typewriter 
and ribbon were used to produce the document. 
 
Avoid Taking Unnecessary Samples 
Fraud examiners do not have to be experts to make preliminary eliminations of some 
suspect typewriters and narrow down the number of typewriters they might have to take 
samples from. Although there are hundreds of different fonts in use on computer printers, 
traditional manual and some electronic typewriters might be eliminated by differences in 
their typeface designs. 
  
Although fonts might appear to be very similar, the observant fraud examiner can 
differentiate between them by concentrating on those letters and numerals that most often 
differ. Note first whether the letter styles on the evidence document and the typewriter are 
serif (the letters have small horizontal bars at the top and bottom of the letters, like little feet) 
or sans serif (no small bars). If they differ, then the typewriter is not the one used. Next, look 
at the shapes of the letters and numerals. Pay particular attention to the small letters f, g, r, t, 
and w, and the numerals 2, 3, 4, and 5. If any of those differ in shape, then the typewriter is 
not the one used.  
 
Taking Typewriter Samples 
Always remove, retain, and preserve the original ribbon first, before taking any samples. 
Place it in a sealed envelope and initial it for later identification. After removing and 
preserving the original ribbon, replace it with a new one and type the samples in the same 
text as the questioned document. Repeat portions of the questioned text several times. After 
taking samples with a ribbon, shift the ribbon adjustment to the “stencil” position.  
 
Insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directly onto the carbon 
paper, using it as a “ribbon” to make typed text on the sheet of paper. Again, type the 
questioned text several times. As each specimen is made, record the brand name, model, and 
serial number of the typewriter used and initial and date each sheet. Place the ribbon and 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
specimens in a plastic or heavy envelope and submit them to the expert along with the 
questioned evidence documents in separate envelopes. 
 
 



:


typewrit and comput printer
typewrit prepar on tradit typebarsegmentshift typewrit both manual and
electr can often be posit identifi by expert from mechan defect uniqu to each
machin typewritten text prepar on latermodel typewrit equip with
interchang daisi wheel ball or baskettyp element ar difficult if not imposs to
identifi computer dot matrix ink jet thermal transfer or laser electrostat printer
ar rare identifi usual the onli expert determin concern these typewrit
and printer ar that the same typefac design and size font letter space and print
process were us
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3115
typewrit ribbon could be evid
oldstyl fabric typewrit ribbon ar rare of ani valu in determin whether a particular
typewrit wa us to prepar a question document fortun for investig most
modern manual and electr typewrit regardless of whether typebar or singl element ar
equip with singleus ribbon if it is suspect that an evid document wa recent
prepar on such a machin remov and examin of the ribbon might reveal the text of
the document expert examin of the ribbon might posit prove that the typewrit
and ribbon were us to produc the document
avoid take unnecessari sampl
fraud examin do not have to be expert to make preliminari elimin of some
suspect typewrit and narrow down the number of typewrit thei might have to take
sampl from although there ar hundr of differ font in us on comput printer
tradit manual and some electron typewrit might be elimin by differ in
their typefac design
although font might appear to be veri similar the observ fraud examin can
differenti between them by concentr on those letter and numer that most often
differ note first whether the letter style on the evid document and the typewrit ar
serif the letter have small horizont bar at the top and bottom of the letter like littl feet
or san serif no small bar if thei differ then the typewrit is not the on us next look
at the shape of the letter and numer pai particular attent to the small letter f g r t
and w and the numer 2 3 4 and 5 if ani of those differ in shape then the typewrit is
not the on us
take typewrit sampl
alwai remov retain and preserv the origin ribbon first befor take ani sampl
place it in a seal envelop and initi it for later identif after remov and
preserv the origin ribbon replac it with a new on and type the sampl in the same
text as the question document repeat portion of the question text sever time after
take sampl with a ribbon shift the ribbon adjust to the stencil posit
insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directli onto the carbon
paper us it as a ribbon to make type text on the sheet of paper again type the
question text sever time as each specimen is made record the brand name model and
serial number of the typewrit us and initi and date each sheet place the ribbon and
analyz document investig
3116 2011 fraud examin manual
specimen in a plastic or heavi envelop and submit them to the expert along with the
question evid document in separ envelop
