2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Dating a Document


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Dating a Document 
Is the document genuine, or a back-dated fabrication? This question sometimes arises during 
fraud inquiries, and the answer can be determined through scientific examinations of the 
document by forensic experts. The fraud examiner should be alert for this type of fraud and 
have some knowledge of what can be done, as well as an awareness of the limitations. 
  
The “Alibi” Document 
These documents suddenly appear “from out of nowhere” and often late in the course of  
an investigation, inquiry, or trial. They are always favorable to the suspect and refute 
previously developed information or evidence that is damaging to the suspect. Many prove 
to be fabricated. 
 
The “Long Lost” Will 
The sudden appearance of a new will that post-dates and supersedes all other wills is all too 
common. Amazingly, it often leaves large portions of the estate to the person who found it, 
and only a photocopy can be located. Many prove to have been fabricated using the cut-and-paste 
method. Although not involving photocopies, the much publicized fabricated and 
forged “Mormon Will” of Howard Hughes in the mid-1970s is a prime example. 
 
Valuable Historical and Collectible Documents 
The production of phony historical and collectible documents, artworks, and antiques has 
been a lucrative field for fraud artists for hundreds of years and continues to the present. 
Recent major frauds involving losses of millions of dollars have involved such diverse phony 
documents as the fake “Hitler Diaries,” counterfeited rare baseball cards, forged autographs 
of historical figures and celebrities, fake old treaties with Native American tribes, newly 
discovered handwritten “rough drafts” of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, Lincoln’s 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.119 
Gettysburg Address and other famous historical documents, several counterfeited and 
forged “Mormon” documents, counterfeited “first edition” books, and many others. 
 
Anachronisms in Documentary Materials 
Exposure of fraudulent historical documents often relies upon the combined skills of 
investigators, historical experts, scientific laboratories, and forensic document examiners. 
Accurate handwriting comparisons are rarely possible in the absence of adequate 
contemporaneous genuine writings of the purported author. Instead, examinations are made 
of the materials used to produce the documents, such as paper, ink, printing, adhesives and 
seals, bindings, and covers. Detection of backdated contemporary documents usually relies 
upon diligent investigation and the techniques of the forensic document examiner. 
 
When adequate handwriting or signature samples are available, expert comparisons can 
expose the forgery. Otherwise, in order to disprove the purported date of the document, 
analyses of the materials might prove that they did not exist at the time the document was 
supposedly prepared. Expert examinations of contemporary documentary materials include: 
• Ink analyses and comparisons with a library of ink standards maintained by the U.S. 
Secret Service Laboratory in Washington, D.C., to determine the kind of ink and when it 
was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of typewriting and comparisons with collections of typewriter reference 
standards maintained by forensic laboratories to determine the kind of typewriter that 
was used and when the typewriter was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of paper, especially watermarked paper, and searches of reference 
materials to determine who manufactured the paper and when it was first produced. 
• Examinations of photocopies and fax copies and comparisons with reference standards 
to determine what kind of machine was used and when those machines were first 
produced. 
• Comparisons of questioned photocopies with photocopies known to have been 
produced on a particular machine on a particular date can prove or disprove the date of 
the questioned copy. 
 
Fraud examiners should note that there are currently no methods for accurately determining 
how long ink, typewriting, or photocopier/printer toner have been on paper. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.120   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


date a document
is the document genuin or a backdat fabric thi question sometim aris dure
fraud inquiri and the answer can be determin through scientif examin of the
document by forens expert the fraud examin should be alert for thi type of fraud and
have some knowledg of what can be done as well as an awar of the limit
the alibi document
these document suddenli appear from out of nowher and often late in the cours of
an investig inquiri or trial thei ar alwai favor to the suspect and refut
previous develop inform or evid that is damag to the suspect mani prove
to be fabric
the long lost will
the sudden appear of a new will that postdat and supersed all other will is all too
common amazingli it often leav larg portion of the estat to the person who found it
and onli a photocopi can be locat mani prove to have been fabric us the cutandpast
method although not involv photocopi the much public fabric and
forg mormon will of howard hugh in the mid1970 is a prime exampl
valuabl histor and collect document
the product of phoni histor and collect document artwork and antiqu ha
been a lucr field for fraud artist for hundr of year and continu to the present
recent major fraud involv loss of million of dollar have involv such divers phoni
document as the fake hitler diari counterfeit rare basebal card forg autograph
of histor figur and celebr fake old treati with nativ american tribe newli
discov handwritten rough draft of the us declar of independ lincoln
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3119
gettysburg address and other famou histor document sever counterfeit and
forg mormon document counterfeit first edit book and mani other
anachron in documentari materi
exposur of fraudul histor document often reli upon the combin skill of
investig histor expert scientif laboratori and forens document examin
accur handwrit comparison ar rare possibl in the absenc of adequ
contemporan genuin write of the purport author instead examin ar made
of the materi us to produc the document such as paper ink print adhes and
seal bind and cover detect of backdat contemporari document usual reli
upon dilig investig and the techniqu of the forens document examin
when adequ handwrit or signatur sampl ar avail expert comparison can
expos the forgeri otherwis in order to disprov the purport date of the document
analys of the materi might prove that thei did not exist at the time the document wa
supposedli prepar expert examin of contemporari documentari materi includ
ink analys and comparison with a librari of ink standard maintain by the us
secret servic laboratori in washington dc to determin the kind of ink and when it
wa first manufactur
examin of typewrit and comparison with collect of typewrit refer
standard maintain by forens laboratori to determin the kind of typewrit that
wa us and when the typewrit wa first manufactur
examin of paper especi watermark paper and search of refer
materi to determin who manufactur the paper and when it wa first produc
examin of photocopi and fax copi and comparison with refer standard
to determin what kind of machin wa us and when those machin were first
produc
comparison of question photocopi with photocopi known to have been
produc on a particular machin on a particular date can prove or disprov the date of
the question copi
fraud examin should note that there ar current no method for accur determin
how long ink typewrit or photocopierprint toner have been on paper
analyz document investig
3120 2011 fraud examin manual
