2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
 
Much of our understanding of human behavior ca n be attributed to B.F. Skinner, described 
by many as one of the greatest social scientists of the twentieth century. Skinner promised 
that he would revolutionize not just psychology, but all of human society with his theories of 
behaviorism. According to Skinner, human behavior should be approached scientifically. 
Instead of worrying over men’s souls or quibbling about what makes up the Self, 
behaviorists would deal with what people actually do. By analyzing people’s actions, the 
behaviorist could then alter or direct any behavior for the greater good of all. Criminal 
behavior could be modified into productive action; rearing a family would cease to be a 
continual game of trial and error — the pitfalls would be replaced by basic behavioral 
principles. 
 
Skinner’s accomplishments may have fallen short of this lofty goal. But while he’s not as 
widely recognized as Sigmund Freud, Skinner’s influence permeates many areas, often 
without being overtly attributed to the methods Skinner proposed in Walden Two  (1948) and 
Science and Human Behavior  (1953). When lawyers argue the mitigating or exonerating 
circumstances of a client’s case, they often use behaviorist ideas; entire theories of 
management rest on the assumption that incentives and promotion are not just the best way to 
sell something; they’re the best way to  ensure that employees work properly. 
 
 



:


understand human behavior
much of our understand of human behavior ca n be attribut to bf skinner describ
by mani as on of the greatest social scientist of the twentieth centuri skinner promis
that he would revolution not just psycholog but all of human societi with hi theori of
behavior accord to skinner human behavior should be approach scientif
instead of worri over men soul or quibbl about what make up the self
behaviorist would deal with what peopl actual do by analyz peopl action the
behaviorist could then alter or direct ani behavior for the greater good of all crimin
behavior could be modifi into product action rear a famili would ceas to be a
continu game of trial and error the pitfal would be replac by basic behavior
principl
skinner accomplish mai have fallen short of thi lofti goal but while he not as
wide recogn as sigmund freud skinner influenc permeat mani area often
without be overtli attribut to the method skinner propos in walden two 1948 and
scienc and human behavior 1953 when lawyer argu the mitig or exoner
circumst of a client case thei often us behaviorist idea entir theori of
manag rest on the assumpt that incent and promot ar not just the best wai to
sell someth theyr the best wai to ensur that employe work properli
