2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Behavioral Analysis and the Detection of Fraud


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Behavioral Analysis and the Detection of Fraud 
When a detective searches for a suspect’s motive, the detective is using behaviorist methods 
of analysis. The suspect, it is assumed, was stimulated by some arrangement of factors. Many 
courses in criminology are built around the fundamental premise that crimes are particular 
sorts of behavior and best understood as the product of operant conditioning. Fraud 
examiners often use the same methods in approaching a case. When money is missing, the 
examiner traces the known flow of funds and then asks, “Who had the opportunity and the 
motive to get at this money?” Even without being conscious of the fact, the examiner is 
performing a behaviorist analysis on the crime. 
 
Ultimately, the question of fraud and behavior comes down to this—what can we do about it?  
We know that people commit these crimes at an alarming rate. Incidents range from the 
clerk who skims a few hundred dollars off a business’s daily deposits, to multimillion-dollar 
scam artists who destroy entire organizations. There’s a world of difference between the 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
skimming clerk and the scamming financial executive — so can we even analyze the two 
people within the same system of fraud? 
 
A fraud examiner working with behaviorist principles knows that the difference between 
crimes lies in the different behaviors. The man who plays million-dollar games with other 
people’s money is stimulated and reinforced by a distinct set of factors, and so too is the 
clerk who builds a family nest egg from his three-figure thefts. So when an examiner is asked 
to go beyond crime-solving and to consult on fraud prevention, the job demands a thorough 
analysis of behavior. 
 
It is important to think of employment as a system of behavior because so much fraud 
occurs in workplace environments, and because such thinking highlights the connection 
between economics and people’s actions. For both the crook and the dedicated worker, 
money exerts a powerful influence, and this is not likely to change. The resourceful 
employer, then, should consider the best way to establish a positive set of relations between 
employees and the funds flowing through the company. The more rigorously we understand 
how people behave, the better equipped we are to change the way they behave. 
 
Behavioral studies such as those conducted by Skinner show that punishment is the least 
effective method of changing behavior. Punishing brings “a temporary suppression of the 
behavior,” but only with constant supervision and application. In repeated experiments, 
Skinner found that punishment — either applying a negative stimulus, or taking away a 
positive one — effectively extinguished a subject’s behavior, but that the behavior returned 
“when the punishment was discontinued... and eventually all responses came out” again. 
The subject would suppress the behavior as long as the punishment was applied directly and 
continually, but as soon as the punishment was withdrawn for a while, the behavior was 
attempted again; if there was no punishment following the attempt, the subject began to 
behave as before.  
 
Behaviorally, reinforcement and punishment are distinguished by the ways that positive and 
negative forces are applied. A positive reinforcement presents a positive stimulus in exchange for 
the desired response. Fathers say to their sons, “You’ve cleaned your room. Good. Here’s 
the key to the car.” The behavior (cleaning) is given in return for the car. A negative 
reinforcement, on the other hand, withdraws a negative stimulus in exchange for the response. 
So the father says, “I’ll stop hassling you if you clean this room.” The negative (hassling) is 
withdrawn when the appropriate behavior is performed.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.103  



:


behavior analysi and the detect of fraud
when a detect search for a suspect motiv the detect is us behaviorist method
of analysi the suspect it is assum wa stimul by some arrang of factor mani
cours in criminolog ar built around the fundament premis that crime ar particular
sort of behavior and best understood as the product of oper condit fraud
examin often us the same method in approach a case when monei is miss the
examin trace the known flow of fund and then ask who had the opportun and the
motiv to get at thi monei even without be consciou of the fact the examin is
perform a behaviorist analysi on the crime
ultim the question of fraud and behavior come down to thiswhat can we do about it
we know that peopl commit these crime at an alarm rate incid rang from the
clerk who skim a few hundr dollar off a businesss daili deposit to multimilliondollar
scam artist who destroi entir organ there a world of differ between the
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4102 2011 fraud examin manual
skim clerk and the scam financi execut so can we even analyz the two
peopl within the same system of fraud
a fraud examin work with behaviorist principl know that the differ between
crime li in the differ behavior the man who plai milliondollar game with other
peopl monei is stimul and reinforc by a distinct set of factor and so too is the
clerk who build a famili nest egg from hi threefigur theft so when an examin is ask
to go beyond crimesolv and to consult on fraud prevent the job demand a thorough
analysi of behavior
it is import to think of employ as a system of behavior becaus so much fraud
occur in workplac environ and becaus such think highlight the connect
between econom and peopl action for both the crook and the dedic worker
monei exert a power influenc and thi is not like to chang the resourc
employ then should consid the best wai to establish a posit set of relat between
employe and the fund flow through the compani the more rigor we understand
how peopl behav the better equip we ar to chang the wai thei behav
behavior studi such as those conduct by skinner show that punish is the least
effect method of chang behavior punish bring a temporari suppress of the
behavior but onli with constant supervis and applic in repeat experi
skinner found that punish either appli a neg stimulu or take awai a
posit on effect extinguish a subject behavior but that the behavior return
when the punish wa discontinu and eventu all respons came out again
the subject would suppress the behavior as long as the punish wa appli directli and
continu but as soon as the punish wa withdrawn for a while the behavior wa
attempt again if there wa no punish follow the attempt the subject began to
behav as befor
behavior reinforc and punish ar distinguish by the wai that posit and
neg forc ar appli a posit reinforc present a posit stimulu in exchang for
the desir respons father sai to their son youv clean your room good here
the kei to the car the behavior clean is given in return for the car a neg
reinforc on the other hand withdraw a neg stimulu in exchang for the respons
so the father sai ill stop hassl you if you clean thi room the neg hassl is
withdrawn when the appropri behavior is perform
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4103
