2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Legitimacy


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Legitimacy  
By definition, effective leadership must produce compliance with a leader’s decisions. 
However, it is sometimes the case that when new legislation or policy is introduced, public 
support and compliance do not occur. Supreme Court decisions, notably on school prayer, do 
not necessarily produce general public acceptance of or adherence to policy. Likewise, if a 
company introduces a new policy that no employee may take a gift (no matter how small) from 
a potential vendor, many employees will continue to take small gifts anyway. 
 
Altering citizens’ behavior by manipulating access to valued resources or threatening to 
impose sanctions is known as social control. Once again, the concept is that reward and 
punishment are what cause people to obey the law. People maximize their personal gain and 
comply based on deterrence. Of course, life is more complicated than reward and 
punishment. Otherwise, the job of law enforcement would be easy. But social control 
appeals to authorities. The public understands deterrence, rewards, and punishment. In 
contrast, emphasizing the normative approach places power not in authorities, but in the 
people whose voluntary compliance is sought. 
 
In studying general compliance with the law, sociologists have found that deterrence does 
not fully explain why people obey the law. Citizens choose to obey the law when the chances 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
of being caught violating it are virtually zero, as when one might come upon a stop sign in a 
deserted street. Almost all Americans pay their income taxes in a voluntary system, even 
though the chances of being caught shaving taxes owed are small. Yet citizens break the law 
when it is risky to do so, as when they buy illegal drugs or embezzle thousands of dollars 
from their company. 
 
In a democracy, the legal system cannot function if it can influence people only by 
manipulating rewards and costs. The resources required to enforce such a regime are too 
high. Deterrence is expensive to enforce and does not guarantee an adequate level of 
obedience. Drunk driving is a good example. Studies show that an extremely high 
investment of resources is needed to convince people that the likelihood of being caught and 
punished for driving drunk is high. Public campaigns against drunk driving tend to 
temporarily reduce the number of DUIs or DWIs. As long as citizens think the chances of 
being caught are rising, the incidences of drunk driving remain lower. However, as soon as 
public perception of increased vigilance against drunk driving lessens, the number of arrests 
goes up again. Likewise, as is discussed later  in the “Fraud Prevention Programs” chapter, 
increasing the perception of detection is a powerful anti-fraud program. If an employee 
thinks that his company is not paying attention to occupational fraud, then some employees 
are more likely to try to get away with it.  
 
Consider the use of marijuana, an illegal yet still popular drug. If the reason people abstain 
from using this drug is that they believe in complying with the law, then obviously in their 
eyes the authorities have legitimacy. However, if they forgo marijuana use because it violates 
their moral values, then it is their convictions that are the deciding factor. If fear of legal 
punishment stops them, then deterrence carries greater weight with them. And if they refrain 
out of fear of social ostracism, then the social group’s influence prevails. 
 
A person’s own normative values have the final say about appropriate behavior. Unlike the 
reward and punishment approach, one’s own values are what produce compliance or 
noncompliance with the law in the end. Psychologists refer to this as “internalized 
obligations,” for which citizens take personal responsibility. 
 



:


legitimaci
by definit effect leadership must produc complianc with a leader decis
howev it is sometim the case that when new legisl or polici is introduc public
support and complianc do not occur suprem court decis notabl on school prayer do
not necessarili produc gener public accept of or adher to polici likewis if a
compani introduc a new polici that no employe mai take a gift no matter how small from
a potenti vendor mani employe will continu to take small gift anywai
alter citizen behavior by manipul access to valu resourc or threaten to
impos sanction is known as social control onc again the concept is that reward and
punish ar what caus peopl to obei the law peopl maxim their person gain and
compli base on deterr of cours life is more complic than reward and
punish otherwis the job of law enforc would be easi but social control
appeal to author the public understand deterr reward and punish in
contrast emphas the norm approach place power not in author but in the
peopl whose voluntari complianc is sought
in studi gener complianc with the law sociologist have found that deterr doe
not fulli explain why peopl obei the law citizen choos to obei the law when the chanc
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4110 2011 fraud examin manual
of be caught violat it ar virtual zero as when on might come upon a stop sign in a
desert street almost all american pai their incom tax in a voluntari system even
though the chanc of be caught shave tax ow ar small yet citizen break the law
when it is riski to do so as when thei bui illeg drug or embezzl thousand of dollar
from their compani
in a democraci the legal system cannot function if it can influenc peopl onli by
manipul reward and cost the resourc requir to enforc such a regim ar too
high deterr is expens to enforc and doe not guarante an adequ level of
obedi drunk drive is a good exampl studi show that an extrem high
invest of resourc is need to convinc peopl that the likelihood of be caught and
punish for drive drunk is high public campaign against drunk drive tend to
temporarili reduc the number of dui or dwi as long as citizen think the chanc of
be caught ar rise the incid of drunk drive remain lower howev as soon as
public percept of increas vigil against drunk drive lessen the number of arrest
goe up again likewis as is discuss later in the fraud prevent program chapter
increas the percept of detect is a power antifraud program if an employe
think that hi compani is not pai attent to occup fraud then some employe
ar more like to try to get awai with it
consid the us of marijuana an illeg yet still popular drug if the reason peopl abstain
from us thi drug is that thei believ in compli with the law then obvious in their
ey the author have legitimaci howev if thei forgo marijuana us becaus it violat
their moral valu then it is their convict that ar the decid factor if fear of legal
punish stop them then deterr carri greater weight with them and if thei refrain
out of fear of social ostrac then the social group influenc prevail
a person own norm valu have the final sai about appropri behavior unlik the
reward and punish approach on own valu ar what produc complianc or
noncompli with the law in the end psychologist refer to thi as intern
oblig for which citizen take person respons
