2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Legitimacy and Compliance


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Legitimacy and Compliance 
Legitimacy is regarded as the essential ingredient in what gives governments and leaders 
authority. The idea is that if the authorities have legitimacy, the public will obey the law. 
Tyler’s Chicago Study, however, was designed to put this concept to the test. 
 
The study did show that legitimacy is related to compliance. Participants who attributed 
greater legitimacy to authorities were more likely to obey the law, for instance. This does not 
prove a causal relationship, though. The results of the study were analyzed to account for 
demographic and sociological factors. This “regression analysis” suggests that legitimacy has 
a significant effect on compliance, regardless of the other factors. 
 
Certainly, legitimacy’s impact on a person is in fluenced by his personal experiences with 
police and courts. A person who feels mistreated by the authorities is certainly less likely to 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.113  
have confidence in their legitimacy and therefore is less likely to obey laws. In such cases, 
peer approval seems to take on greater importance in those people’s thinking. One more 
interesting result was that those participants who considered themselves politically liberal 
were more likely than those who regarded themselves as moderate to base compliant 
behavior on feelings of legitimacy. 
 



:


legitimaci and complianc
legitimaci is regard as the essenti ingredi in what give govern and leader
author the idea is that if the author have legitimaci the public will obei the law
tyler chicago studi howev wa design to put thi concept to the test
the studi did show that legitimaci is relat to complianc particip who attribut
greater legitimaci to author were more like to obei the law for instanc thi doe not
prove a causal relationship though the result of the studi were analyz to account for
demograph and sociolog factor thi regress analysi suggest that legitimaci ha
a signific effect on complianc regardless of the other factor
certainli legitimaci impact on a person is in fluenc by hi person experi with
polic and court a person who feel mistreat by the author is certainli less like to
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4113
have confid in their legitimaci and therefor is less like to obei law in such case
peer approv seem to take on greater import in those peopl think on more
interest result wa that those particip who consid themselv polit liber
were more like than those who regard themselv as moder to base compliant
behavior on feel of legitimaci
