2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Check Theft


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Check Theft 
Three types of check theft are:  using stolen canceled checks to obtain new checks, check 
washing, and stealing blank check stock. 
• Stolen canceled checks and statements — Although a stolen canceled check can’t be negotiated, 
it does have fraud implications. Using a stolen canceled check, a check thief can order 
checks from a mail-order check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address. 
Checks can then be written on the new stock and cashed once false identifications are 
acquired. 
• Check washing — Check washing takes place to the tu ne of $815 million every year in the 
U.S., and it is increasing at an alarming rate. Checks are stolen from mailrooms and 
mailboxes, and then the check is inserted into a solution of chemicals that can be 
purchased at a hardware store. Once the check is dried, the fraudster can write in any 
amount and the checks are usually cashed without question. Most check washers alter 
checks for relatively small amounts. 
• Stolen check stock — Professional thieves using sophisticated methods steal blank check 
stock already encoded with customer account information, which makes passing the 
check even easier. Corporate checks are the most likely target since they are easily cashed 
and deposited. 
 



:


check theft
three type of check theft ar us stolen cancel check to obtain new check check
wash and steal blank check stock
stolen cancel check and statement although a stolen cancel check cant be negoti
it doe have fraud implic us a stolen cancel check a check thief can order
check from a mailord check printer and have them sent to a mail drop address
check can then be written on the new stock and cash onc fals identif ar
acquir
check wash check wash take place to the tu ne of 815 million everi year in the
us and it is increas at an alarm rate check ar stolen from mailroom and
mailbox and then the check is insert into a solut of chemic that can be
purchas at a hardwar store onc the check is dri the fraudster can write in ani
amount and the check ar usual cash without question most check washer alter
check for rel small amount
stolen check stock profession thiev us sophist method steal blank check
stock alreadi encod with custom account inform which make pass the
check even easier corpor check ar the most like target sinc thei ar easili cash
and deposit
