2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Electronic Bill Payment and Person-to-Person Payments/A Model of P2P: PayPal


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


A Model of P2P: PayPal 
There is a significant opportunity for change and growth in implementation since P2P 
systems are still in their beginning stages. PayPal is dominant in the market at this point, so 
we will use it as the model of the P2P system for illustrative purposes. Potential users of the 
system must log in to the provider’s websi te and submit registration information including 
their name, mailing and e-mail addresses, and phone number. An e-mail is sent from PayPal 
to the user’s provided e-mail address with the user’s password. Before initiating any 
transfers, the user must send that password from the e-mail account that the user indicated 
at the time of registration. This permits the provider to verify information about the user 
and reduce the probability that the user is engaged in fraudulent activity or has established an 
account in the name of a fictitious person.  
 
In order to make a payment, the user enters his username and password along with the e-
 mail address and payment information for the recipient. Users may authorize the provider to 
withdraw funds from any of three sources. First, the user may maintain an account directly 
with the provider. The user may authorize the provider to withdraw funds from the user’s 
account at another financial institution. If the user registers his bank account as a source of 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1040                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
payment, the provider will verify the user’s control of the account by making two small 
deposits to the account in an undisclosed amount and requiring the user to confirm the 
amount of the deposits. Third, the user may authorize the provider to charge his credit card 
with the amount of the payment.  
 
Transfers initiated by the user from his account registered with the provider will constitute 
electronic fund transfers. This is true even if the provider is not a bank. (Proprietary 
providers such as PayPal probably do not qualify as “banks” because they do not make 
loans. They may, however, qualify as money transmitters and may require state licenses for 
that purpose.) The EFTA defines an electronic fund transfer as a transfer of funds “initiated 
through an electronic terminal, telephonic instrument, or computer so as to order a 
financial institution to debit or credit an account.” But a “financial institution” is defined 
with sufficient breadth to include institutions that do not qualify as banks. A “financial 
institution” for purposes of EFTA is “any person who, directly, or indirectly, holds an 
account belonging to a consumer,” and an “account” is any “asset account established 
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes.” Therefore, electronic transfers 
initiated by a consumer to transfer funds from an asset account held by a proprietary P2P 
provider would be governed by EFTA and Regulation E.  
 



:


a model of p2p paypal
there is a signific opportun for chang and growth in implement sinc p2p
system ar still in their begin stage paypal is domin in the market at thi point so
we will us it as the model of the p2p system for illustr purpos potenti user of the
system must log in to the provid websi te and submit registr inform includ
their name mail and email address and phone number an email is sent from paypal
to the user provid email address with the user password befor initi ani
transfer the user must send that password from the email account that the user indic
at the time of registr thi permit the provid to verifi inform about the user
and reduc the probabl that the user is engag in fraudul activ or ha establish an
account in the name of a fictiti person
in order to make a payment the user enter hi usernam and password along with the e
mail address and payment inform for the recipi user mai author the provid to
withdraw fund from ani of three sourc first the user mai maintain an account directli
with the provid the user mai author the provid to withdraw fund from the user
account at anoth financi institut if the user regist hi bank account as a sourc of
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11040 2011 fraud examin manual
payment the provid will verifi the user control of the account by make two small
deposit to the account in an undisclos amount and requir the user to confirm the
amount of the deposit third the user mai author the provid to charg hi credit card
with the amount of the payment
transfer initi by the user from hi account regist with the provid will constitut
electron fund transfer thi is true even if the provid is not a bank proprietari
provid such as paypal probabl do not qualifi as bank becaus thei do not make
loan thei mai howev qualifi as monei transmitt and mai requir state licens for
that purpos the efta defin an electron fund transfer as a transfer of fund initi
through an electron termin telephon instrument or comput so as to order a
financi institut to debit or credit an account but a financi institut is defin
with suffici breadth to includ institut that do not qualifi as bank a financi
institut for purpos of efta is ani person who directli or indirectli hold an
account belong to a consum and an account is ani asset account establish
primarili for person famili or household purpos therefor electron transfer
initi by a consum to transfer fund from an asset account held by a proprietari p2p
provid would be govern by efta and regul e
