2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/What Constitutes a Security?/Examples of Investment Contracts/PONZI SCHEMES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


PONZI SCHEMES 
A Ponzi scheme is named after Charles Ponzi who, in the early 1920s, persuaded tens of 
thousands of Bostonians to invest over $10 million. He created an entity, aptly named the 
Securities and Exchange Company, and issued investors a promissory note guaranteeing a 50 
percent return in 90 days on every $1,000 invested. 
 
The scheme involved the alleged buying of international postal reply coupons in Europe 
using foreign currencies, which had depreciated substantially against the dollar in the years 
after World War I. Ponzi claimed that these coupons, bought at a discount, could then be 
redeemed at full face value, yielding a substantial profit. 
 
There were two main problems. First, although Ponzi claimed to be trading over $10 million 
worth of postal reply coupons, only a few hundred thousand dollars worth actually existed. 
A more fatal flaw was the fact that the scheme relied on new investor funds to pay returns to 
earlier investors. In August 1920, after the inevitable collapse of his scheme, Ponzi was 
arrested for mail fraud and larceny. Ponzi served jail time and was later deported to his 
native Italy. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1519 
Of course, the most infamous and costly Ponzi scheme was that of Bernard Madoff. In 
2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, one 
count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He was 
sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion dollars (the 
amount prosecutors say flowed through his business).  
 
Madoff told his clients that he generated such high returns by employing a “split-strike 
conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that involves a 
combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to generate 
predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely correlated to 
an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put options on the 
same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay clients who 
requested withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds 
from new investments to pay them off, and so, like all Ponzi schemes, it collapsed. The 
“Consumer Fraud” chapter contains more detail about the Madoff case. 
 



:


ponzi scheme
a ponzi scheme is name after charl ponzi who in the earli 1920 persuad ten of
thousand of bostonian to invest over 10 million he creat an entiti aptli name the
secur and exchang compani and issu investor a promissori note guarante a 50
percent return in 90 dai on everi 1000 invest
the scheme involv the alleg bui of intern postal repli coupon in europ
us foreign currenc which had depreci substanti against the dollar in the year
after world war i ponzi claim that these coupon bought at a discount could then be
redeem at full face valu yield a substanti profit
there were two main problem first although ponzi claim to be trade over 10 million
worth of postal repli coupon onli a few hundr thousand dollar worth actual exist
a more fatal flaw wa the fact that the scheme reli on new investor fund to pai return to
earlier investor in august 1920 after the inevit collaps of hi scheme ponzi wa
arrest for mail fraud and larceni ponzi serv jail time and wa later deport to hi
nativ itali
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11519
of cours the most infam and costli ponzi scheme wa that of bernard madoff in
2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud on
count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he wa
sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion dollar the
amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi
madoff told hi client that he gener such high return by emploi a splitstrik
convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that involv a
combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to gener
predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close correl to
an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put option on the
same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who
request withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund
from new invest to pai them off and so like all ponzi scheme it collaps the
consum fraud chapter contain more detail about the madoff case
