2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/What Constitutes a Security?/Examples of Investment Contracts/OIL, GAS, AND MINERAL INTERESTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


OIL, GAS, AND MINERAL INTERESTS 
Usually the sale of fractional ownership of oil and gas wells, or mineral rights constitutes the 
sale of a security. The misrepresentations and omissions found in oil and gas scams are often 
repeated in other mineral mining schemes, such as gold or coal. Investors have a right to be 
advised of the risks inherent in a securities investment and oil/gas opportunities are 
traditionally very high risk. If investors have been assured or guaranteed of success in 
striking oil, fraud examiners should consider that a red flag. Naturally, as in all cases of 
securities fraud, one should look for discrepancies in promoters’ credentials, business 
history, and commission. The following types of misrepresentations and omissions are often 
encountered: 
• Drilling and completion costs — Costs are often hugely inflated to bilk the investor. 
• Lease — Promoters frequently do not have a valid mineral rights lease. 
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1522                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Discovery and production potential — The investor may be misled regarding the 
likelihood of striking oil and the amount produced. This information is usually contained 
in the geologist’s report. 
• Wells — The promoter may exaggerate the number and depth of wells, thus inflating the 
operating costs paid by investors. 
• Self-dealing — The promoter may declare a good well dry in order to reap the benefits of 
a productive well later when the investors have given up. 
• Dry holes — Often these are completed by the promoter solely to improve his 
completion record and collect completion funds from investors. 
• Royalties — Insiders may be assigned the majority of royalties while investors receive only 
a small portion. 
• Number of partners — Promoters are likely to oversell the well, i.e., 99/64ths. 
 
Occasionally, the investment may be a complete fabrication. This is even more likely in 
overseas mineral investments. Geologists’ re ports may be falsified or promoters may  
rely on investors’ reluctance to travel to remote spots in order to see their well or mine  
for themselves.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A good example of this is the Bre-X gold scandal that occurred in the spring of 1997. The 
Canadian mining company claimed to have found the largest gold deposit discovered in the 
twentieth century in Busang, on the island of Borneo. Share pric es of the before unheard of, 
penny-stock company skyrocketed as rumors of the tremendous discovery circulated. 
Optimistic investors largely ignored the red flags that began to emerge. The initial concern 
that most had was that the mine was located in Indonesia, creating potential difficulties due 
to poor U.S. relations with that country.  
 
Not to be deterred by proximity or diplomatic difficulties, investors continued to avidly 
acquire stock in the former junior mining company. Bre-X geological reports of as many as 
5.68 grams of gold per ton continued the trend. Then, however, a multitude of problems 
seemed to arise. 
 
The accuracy of the sampling began to come into question. Instead of preserving parts of the 
core samples for verification, Bre-X allowed them to be crushed. And soon after, a fire 
destroyed the geologists’ records, further casting the veracity of the discovery into doubt. 
Insiders began surreptitiously selling off large amounts of their shares. News that the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1523 
Indonesian government had withheld key permits was concealed from investors. After the 
exploration manager’s mysterious death (he supposedly committed suicide by jumping out of 
a helicopter), share prices plunged from approximately C$100 to around C$2. Bre-X’s 
market value declined by 90 percent. The Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement 
System lost C$45 million and Canada’s Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec recorded 
a loss of C$70 million. The core samples, it was later revealed, had been “salted.” 
 
The most disturbing aspect of this case is the severe handicap investigators faced caused by 
jurisdictional questions. “This could be a monumental scam that will be nearly impossible 
to prosecute,” said a private investigator wo rking on the case. He explains some of the 
difficulties, “No one really has jurisdiction. The salting [of the gold samples] took place in 
Indonesia, but what laws were really broken in that country? The law against salting? 
There is none. The law against deceiving shareholders? That happened in Canada and the 
U.S. Most of the main suspects probably disappeared in the Philippines. But what law did 
they break in the Philippines? Are they fugitives? No. Can a prosecutor in Canada get a 
warrant for those guys in the Philippines for what they did in Indonesia? Very tricky.” 
 
In Indonesia, no extradition or law-enforcement cooperation agreements exist with Canada 
or the U.S., which means the criminal investigation is being handled by the Indonesians 
themselves. Likewise, though the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta has been asked by 
Washington to look into the Busang fraud, the U.S. and Indonesia have a poor track 
record of cooperating in criminal matters.  
 
Investors in such ventures can easily find themselves with no legal recourse if things go 
wrong. Obviously, different countries have varying laws regarding investor rights. Naturally, 
this makes investigating a case such as this quite difficult. The principals of Bre-X claimed 
not to have known about sample salting. They portrayed themselves as victims and blamed 
the geologists for the fraudulent samples. The geologists, however, were Philippine nationals 
and retreated to their homeland, further complicating the investigation. The Philippine 
government suspects foul play in the death of the head geologist, Michael de Guzman, and is 
more concerned with the Indonesian inquiry into the matter than with turning over their 
countrymen for questioning. 
 
When examining the case from a “follow the money” standpoint, the trail seems to lead to 
Bre-X insiders. Even as they concealed news of  permits being withheld by the Indonesian 
government, insiders secretly sold off huge amounts of stock at great profit. According to 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1524                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the Wall Street Journal, Bre-X Chairman David Walsh, Vice Chairman and Chief Geologist 
John Felderhof, and two other executives sold nearly C$38 million of stock. 
 



:


oil ga and miner interest
usual the sale of fraction ownership of oil and ga well or miner right constitut the
sale of a secur the misrepresent and omiss found in oil and ga scam ar often
repeat in other miner mine scheme such as gold or coal investor have a right to be
advis of the risk inher in a secur invest and oilga opportun ar
tradition veri high risk if investor have been assur or guarante of success in
strike oil fraud examin should consid that a red flag natur as in all case of
secur fraud on should look for discrep in promot credenti busi
histori and commiss the follow type of misrepresent and omiss ar often
encount
drill and complet cost cost ar often huge inflat to bilk the investor
leas promot frequent do not have a valid miner right leas
secur fraud financi transact
11522 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri and product potenti the investor mai be misl regard the
likelihood of strike oil and the amount produc thi inform is usual contain
in the geologist report
well the promot mai exagger the number and depth of well thu inflat the
oper cost paid by investor
selfdeal the promot mai declar a good well dry in order to reap the benefit of
a product well later when the investor have given up
dry hole often these ar complet by the promot sole to improv hi
complet record and collect complet fund from investor
royalti insid mai be assign the major of royalti while investor receiv onli
a small portion
number of partner promot ar like to oversel the well ie 9964th
occasion the invest mai be a complet fabric thi is even more like in
oversea miner invest geologist re port mai be falsifi or promot mai
reli on investor reluct to travel to remot spot in order to see their well or mine
for themselv
exampl
a good exampl of thi is the brex gold scandal that occur in the spring of 1997 the
canadian mine compani claim to have found the largest gold deposit discov in the
twentieth centuri in busang on the island of borneo share pric es of the befor unheard of
pennystock compani skyrocket as rumor of the tremend discoveri circul
optimist investor larg ignor the red flag that began to emerg the initi concern
that most had wa that the mine wa locat in indonesia creat potenti difficulti due
to poor us relat with that countri
not to be deter by proxim or diplomat difficulti investor continu to avidli
acquir stock in the former junior mine compani brex geolog report of as mani as
568 gram of gold per ton continu the trend then howev a multitud of problem
seem to aris
the accuraci of the sampl began to come into question instead of preserv part of the
core sampl for verif brex allow them to be crush and soon after a fire
destroi the geologist record further cast the verac of the discoveri into doubt
insid began surreptiti sell off larg amount of their share new that the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11523
indonesian govern had withheld kei permit wa conceal from investor after the
explor manag mysteri death he supposedli commit suicid by jump out of
a helicopt share price plung from approxim c100 to around c2 brex
market valu declin by 90 percent the ontario municip employe retir
system lost c45 million and canada caiss de dpt et placement du qubec record
a loss of c70 million the core sampl it wa later reveal had been salt
the most disturb aspect of thi case is the sever handicap investig face caus by
jurisdict question thi could be a monument scam that will be nearli imposs
to prosecut said a privat investig wo rking on the case he explain some of the
difficulti no on realli ha jurisdict the salt of the gold sampl took place in
indonesia but what law were realli broken in that countri the law against salt
there is none the law against deceiv sharehold that happen in canada and the
us most of the main suspect probabl disappear in the philippin but what law did
thei break in the philippin ar thei fugit no can a prosecutor in canada get a
warrant for those gui in the philippin for what thei did in indonesia veri tricki
in indonesia no extradit or lawenforc cooper agreement exist with canada
or the us which mean the crimin investig is be handl by the indonesian
themselv likewis though the us embassi in jakarta ha been ask by
washington to look into the busang fraud the us and indonesia have a poor track
record of cooper in crimin matter
investor in such ventur can easili find themselv with no legal recours if thing go
wrong obvious differ countri have vari law regard investor right natur
thi make investig a case such as thi quit difficult the princip of brex claim
not to have known about sampl salt thei portrai themselv as victim and blame
the geologist for the fraudul sampl the geologist howev were philippin nation
and retreat to their homeland further complic the investig the philippin
govern suspect foul plai in the death of the head geologist michael de guzman and is
more concern with the indonesian inquiri into the matter than with turn over their
countrymen for question
when examin the case from a follow the monei standpoint the trail seem to lead to
brex insid even as thei conceal new of permit be withheld by the indonesian
govern insid secretli sold off huge amount of stock at great profit accord to
secur fraud financi transact
11524 2011 fraud examin manual
the wall street journal brex chairman david walsh vice chairman and chief geologist
john felderhof and two other execut sold nearli c38 million of stock
