2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options/Commodity Futures Primer


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Commodity Futures Primer 
As mentioned previously, commodity futures contracts are agreements between buyers and 
sellers to make or take delivery of a commodity at a future date, at an agreed upon price. 
Commodity futures contracts are standardized. Contract specifications such as the contract 
size, delivery months, commodity grade, location of delivery, and other details for each 
futures contract are preset in the contract terms. Price and quantity are the only things 
negotiated by the counterparties to a trade. In the United States, agricultural, industrial, and 
financial futures are traded on organized exchanges known as contract markets. 
 
The possibility of delivery keeps futures contracts in line with their underlying cash markets. 
If a contract rises too high in price relative to the cash market, traders might sell futures with 
the intent of making delivery. This forces the futures price down and is the reason futures 
markets reflect the price of their underlying cash market. Some futures contracts are “cash 
settled.” The value of these contracts is derived from an underlying index value. When a 
futures contract is cash settled, traders will often use a calculated “fair value” to determine if 
the futures are high or low compared to the underlying index. If fair value indicates that 
futures are too high, a trader might sell futures, expecting the difference to narrow.  
 
Futures contracts do not have any intrinsic value in and of themselves; their value is derived 
from the underlying commodity, index, or security. Because futures contracts “derive” their 
price from their underlying cash market, they are called derivatives. There are other 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1527 
derivative markets, such as exchange-traded options on futures, options on securities, and 
over-the-counter (OTC) options, which will be discussed later in this section. The contracts 
traded on these markets also derive their values from an underlying commodity, security,  
or index. 
 



:


commod futur primer
as mention previous commod futur contract ar agreement between buyer and
seller to make or take deliveri of a commod at a futur date at an agre upon price
commod futur contract ar standard contract specif such as the contract
size deliveri month commod grade locat of deliveri and other detail for each
futur contract ar preset in the contract term price and quantiti ar the onli thing
negoti by the counterparti to a trade in the unit state agricultur industri and
financi futur ar trade on organ exchang known as contract market
the possibl of deliveri keep futur contract in line with their underli cash market
if a contract rise too high in price rel to the cash market trader might sell futur with
the intent of make deliveri thi forc the futur price down and is the reason futur
market reflect the price of their underli cash market some futur contract ar cash
settl the valu of these contract is deriv from an underli index valu when a
futur contract is cash settl trader will often us a calcul fair valu to determin if
the futur ar high or low compar to the underli index if fair valu indic that
futur ar too high a trader might sell futur expect the differ to narrow
futur contract do not have ani intrins valu in and of themselv their valu is deriv
from the underli commod index or secur becaus futur contract deriv their
price from their underli cash market thei ar call deriv there ar other
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11527
deriv market such as exchangetrad option on futur option on secur and
overthecount otc option which will be discuss later in thi section the contract
trade on these market also deriv their valu from an underli commod secur
or index
