2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options/Options Primer


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Options Primer 
Like commodity futures contracts, options contracts are agreements between counterparties. 
The main difference between these markets is that commodity futures impose obligations on 
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physical delivery of the commodity or to 
agree to cash settlement at contract expiration. Options contracts confer rights, not 
obligations, to the option buyer and impose obligations on the option seller. Importantly, if 
an option is not exercised, it just expires (over 90 percent of exchange-traded options expire 
worthless). In contrast, if a commodity contract is held to expiration, the long gets delivery 
and the short must make delivery. Options can be exchange-traded, over-the-counter (OTC), 
between individual business entities, or between individual persons. Businesses and 
individuals commonly use options in real estate, personal property, and interest rate 
transactions.  
 
Standardized exchange-traded options contracts are known as plain vanilla options. That is, 
there are no embedded features that would affect the basic option contract  
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1529 
(off-exchange or OTC options often have embedded features that can make them complex 
or exotic). Standardized equity options are traded at several exchanges in the United States. 
The most successful is the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  
 



:


option primer
like commod futur contract option contract ar agreement between counterparti
the main differ between these market is that commod futur impos oblig on
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physic deliveri of the commod or to
agre to cash settlement at contract expir option contract confer right not
oblig to the option buyer and impos oblig on the option seller importantli if
an option is not exercis it just expir over 90 percent of exchangetrad option expir
worthless in contrast if a commod contract is held to expir the long get deliveri
and the short must make deliveri option can be exchangetrad overthecount otc
between individu busi entiti or between individu person busi and
individu commonli us option in real estat person properti and interest rate
transact
standard exchangetrad option contract ar known as plain vanilla option that is
there ar no embed featur that would affect the basic option contract
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11529
offexchang or otc option often have embed featur that can make them complex
or exot standard equiti option ar trade at sever exchang in the unit state
the most success is the chicago board option exchang cboe
