2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Systematically Trading Accounts Against Each Other


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Systematically Trading Accounts Against Each Other 
Systematically trading accounts against each other usually occurs between investment pools. 
The scheme involves someone with trading authority simultaneously establishing opposite 
market positions in two separate investment pools that he controls. A person who has 
trading authority and other controls over the pool may receive a monthly management fee of 
about 1.5 percent of the pool balance, a percentage of any of the pool’s gains, perhaps 10 
percent per quarter, and a portion or all of the commissions on trades. The conflicts of 
interest in such a business arrangement are obvious. It is in the interest of the pool operator 
to maintain account balances a high as possible, trade the accounts for commissions and to 
have at least some profits. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1537 
Assume that a pool operator established two limited partnerships for trading commodities, 
that he was general partner of both partnerships, and that he was to be compensated as 
previously described. The general partner, who has trading authority, then buys 100 
contracts of December Corn for Pool A, establishing a long market position, and at the 
same time sells 100 contracts of December Corn for Pool B, establishing a short market 
position. (If these transactions occurred in the same account they would offset each other.) 
 
Over time one of the pools will suffer a loss while the other will enjoy a gain. For the general 
partner things haven’t changed much. The amount of equity in the two pools combined will 
be about the same with the loss in one pool being offset by the gain in the other pool. This 
preserves the basis for the general partner’s management fee while the profitable pool will 
owe him a percentage of the gain.  
 
In the long run, one of the investment pools will dissolve because of trading losses while the 
other will enjoy handsome profits. This then takes on some of the characteristics of a Ponzi 
scheme when the pool operator creates a new limited partnership, advertises his success 
from the results of the profitable pool, and participants in the successful pool tell their 
friends. The trick here is to ensure that participants in the original two pools don’t know 
each other.  
 
Supervisors and compliance managers of brokerages should be on the lookout for this type 
of activity. They can do little, however, if the general partner maintains the trading accounts 
at two separate brokerages. The CFE will need to acquire the trading records of all pools run 
by a pool operator in order to establish if such a trading scheme has occurred. The 
comparison of market positions over time is simple and the information is easily obtainable 
from the brokerages once it is discovered who they are.  
 
The general partner would have committed a material breach of contract in that he failed in 
his fiduciary duties to the limited partners. There are also numerous violations of federal 
regulatory and SRO rules that prohibit this type of trading scheme. 
 



:


systemat trade account against each other
systemat trade account against each other usual occur between invest pool
the scheme involv someon with trade author simultan establish opposit
market posit in two separ invest pool that he control a person who ha
trade author and other control over the pool mai receiv a monthli manag fee of
about 15 percent of the pool balanc a percentag of ani of the pool gain perhap 10
percent per quarter and a portion or all of the commiss on trade the conflict of
interest in such a busi arrang ar obviou it is in the interest of the pool oper
to maintain account balanc a high as possibl trade the account for commiss and to
have at least some profit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11537
assum that a pool oper establish two limit partnership for trade commod
that he wa gener partner of both partnership and that he wa to be compens as
previous describ the gener partner who ha trade author then bui 100
contract of decemb corn for pool a establish a long market posit and at the
same time sell 100 contract of decemb corn for pool b establish a short market
posit if these transact occur in the same account thei would offset each other
over time on of the pool will suffer a loss while the other will enjoi a gain for the gener
partner thing havent chang much the amount of equiti in the two pool combin will
be about the same with the loss in on pool be offset by the gain in the other pool thi
preserv the basi for the gener partner manag fee while the profit pool will
ow him a percentag of the gain
in the long run on of the invest pool will dissolv becaus of trade loss while the
other will enjoi handsom profit thi then take on some of the characterist of a ponzi
scheme when the pool oper creat a new limit partnership advertis hi success
from the result of the profit pool and particip in the success pool tell their
friend the trick here is to ensur that particip in the origin two pool dont know
each other
supervisor and complianc manag of brokerag should be on the lookout for thi type
of activ thei can do littl howev if the gener partner maintain the trade account
at two separ brokerag the cfe will need to acquir the trade record of all pool run
by a pool oper in order to establish if such a trade scheme ha occur the
comparison of market posit over time is simpl and the inform is easili obtain
from the brokerag onc it is discov who thei ar
the gener partner would have commit a materi breach of contract in that he fail in
hi fiduciari duti to the limit partner there ar also numer violat of feder
regulatori and sro rule that prohibit thi type of trade scheme
