2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Disclosures (Misrepresentations and Omissions)


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Disclosures (Misrepresentations and Omissions) 
Securities laws require that the investor receive full and fair disclosure of all material 
information. Giving the investor or prospective investor false or misleading information is 
clearly a misrepresentation. An omission occurs when the issuer, in connection with the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1543 
offer or sale of securities, omits a material fact necessary in order to make the statements 
made not misleading. Making misrepresentations to the investor or failing to inform the 
investor of certain facts (omissions) is a violation of both state and federal law only if the 
misrepresentation or omission is material.  
 
It is important to show the materiality of misrepresentations or omissions. Even if 
representations made, for example in a prospectus, are clearly false, it is still necessary to 
show materiality. In a 1988 decision, the Supreme Court stated that a fact is material “if its 
disclosure would change the total mix of facts available and there is a substantial likelihood 
that a reasonable shareholder would consider the facts important to her investment 
decision.”  See, Basic Inc. v Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988). 
 
As a general rule, the examiner or investigator needs to determine the answer to the 
following question: Would a reasonable investor wish to know this information in order to 
make an informed decision? If the answer is “yes,” then this information, or the lack thereof, 
has a high likelihood of being deemed material. (If an actual investor acted based on the 
misrepresentation, that clearly strengthens the case, but it is not essential that the false or 
misleading statement influenced an investor, merely that a reasonable investor could have 
been so influenced.) 
 
The issuer of a biotechnology stock falsely claiming that the Food and Drug Administration 
has approved their new cancer drug would be an example of a misrepresentation that is 
clearly material to any prospective investor. Similarly, if the Chairman of the company had 
recently been released from prison after serving time for securities fraud, this fact should 
feature prominently in any offering document. Failure to disclose this fact would obviously 
constitute the omission of a material fact.    
 
The SEC has adopted a so-called “safe harbor” provision whereby certain forward-looking 
statements and projections will not be held to be fraudulent. Issuers will not be held liable if 
these type of statements were believed true at the time and were accompanied by appropriate 
cautionary language. 
   
Note also that federal and state laws usually prohibit the promoter from stating that the 
offering has government approval of some kind. For example, even if the offering is 
registered, the promoter cannot state that it is “SEC approved.” 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1544                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


disclosur misrepresent and omiss
secur law requir that the investor receiv full and fair disclosur of all materi
inform give the investor or prospect investor fals or mislead inform is
clearli a misrepresent an omiss occur when the issuer in connect with the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11543
offer or sale of secur omit a materi fact necessari in order to make the statement
made not mislead make misrepresent to the investor or fail to inform the
investor of certain fact omiss is a violat of both state and feder law onli if the
misrepresent or omiss is materi
it is import to show the materi of misrepresent or omiss even if
represent made for exampl in a prospectu ar clearli fals it is still necessari to
show materi in a 1988 decis the suprem court state that a fact is materi if it
disclosur would chang the total mix of fact avail and there is a substanti likelihood
that a reason sharehold would consid the fact import to her invest
decis see basic inc v levinson 485 us 224 1988
as a gener rule the examin or investig need to determin the answer to the
follow question would a reason investor wish to know thi inform in order to
make an inform decis if the answer is ye then thi inform or the lack thereof
ha a high likelihood of be deem materi if an actual investor act base on the
misrepresent that clearli strengthen the case but it is not essenti that the fals or
mislead statement influenc an investor mere that a reason investor could have
been so influenc
the issuer of a biotechnolog stock fals claim that the food and drug administr
ha approv their new cancer drug would be an exampl of a misrepresent that is
clearli materi to ani prospect investor similarli if the chairman of the compani had
recent been releas from prison after serv time for secur fraud thi fact should
featur promin in ani offer document failur to disclos thi fact would obvious
constitut the omiss of a materi fact
the sec ha adopt a socal safe harbor provis wherebi certain forwardlook
statement and project will not be held to be fraudul issuer will not be held liabl if
these type of statement were believ true at the time and were accompani by appropri
cautionari languag
note also that feder and state law usual prohibit the promot from state that the
offer ha govern approv of some kind for exampl even if the offer is
regist the promot cannot state that it is sec approv
secur fraud financi transact
11544 2011 fraud examin manual
