2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud and the Internet/Online Trading


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Online Trading 
A recent legal opinion has allowed a bulletin board to be used to buy and sell securities 
without registration. This bypassing of federal registration requirements may make the 
raising of venture capital easier, but it will reduce consumer protection and potentially create 
a regulatory nightmare. 
 
Greater utilization of the Internet to promote both legitimate and fraudulent securities 
offerings will increasingly challenge the investigator or examiner. The fraud examiner will 
continue to face jurisdictional as well as technical issues as the Internet becomes the medium 
of choice for the financial criminal. 
 
[Editor’s Note: The Association would like to thank Chris Hancock, CFE, for his assistance in preparing 
this chapter. Mr. Hancock is the investigations manager for the State of Florida Department of Banking and 
Finance, Northwest Florida Region, and specializes in the investigation of financial crime with an emphasis 
on securities fraud. 
 
We would also like to thank Richard J. Bobel, CFE, MBA, CPA, who authored the material on 
commodities, options, and derivatives. Mr. Bobel is a former commodity broker and college/university faculty 
member who specialized in derivati ve markets and worked for many years as a research economist for the 
Chicago Board of Trade where he designed commodity  futures and options contracts. Richard was a 
contributing author to the CBOT Commodity Trading Manual  and the CBOT Speculation 
Workbook. He can contacted at 847-828-7417 or at RJB@RJBCPA.com] 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1601 



:


onlin trade
a recent legal opinion ha allow a bulletin board to be us to bui and sell secur
without registr thi bypass of feder registr requir mai make the
rais of ventur capit easier but it will reduc consum protect and potenti creat
a regulatori nightmar
greater util of the internet to promot both legitim and fraudul secur
offer will increasingli challeng the investig or examin the fraud examin will
continu to face jurisdict as well as technic issu as the internet becom the medium
of choic for the financi crimin
editor note the associ would like to thank chri hancock cfe for hi assist in prepar
thi chapter mr hancock is the investig manag for the state of florida depart of bank and
financ northwest florida region and special in the investig of financi crime with an emphasi
on secur fraud
we would also like to thank richard j bobel cfe mba cpa who author the materi on
commod option and deriv mr bobel is a former commod broker and collegeunivers faculti
member who special in derivati ve market and work for mani year as a research economist for the
chicago board of trade where he design commod futur and option contract richard wa a
contribut author to the cbot commod trade manual and the cbot specul
workbook he can contact at 8478287417 or at rjbrjbcpacom
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11601
