2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Medicaid Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Medicaid Fraud 
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Social Security Act, which established 
Medicare and Medicaid. These programs provide medical and health-related services to 
specific groups of people in the United States. Both programs are managed by the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), a federal agency within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.  
 
Although both Medicare and Medicaid provide medical and health-related services, there are 
several differences between the two programs. Medicare, which is funded and governed by 
the federal government, is the federal health insurance program for people age 65 or older 
and most people with certain disabilities; it is financed by Social Security contributions. 
Conversely, Medicaid is a federal- and state-funded program that provides health care 
coverage for low-income families and children, medical and long-term care coverage for 
people with disabilities, and assistance with health and long-term care expenses for low-
 income seniors. Although Medicaid is a federal program, it is operated by the states, and 
each state decides eligibility and the scope of coverage. Medicaid does not require recipients 
to make contributions, and it is financed from general revenues. 
 
According to the federal government, Medicaid fraud involves purposely billing Medicaid for 
services that were never provided or received. 
 
As the number of individuals enrolled in Medi caid increases, the amount of funds being 
expended by these programs leaves the industry at a significant risk for fraudulent claims. 
Medicaid expenditures comprised $216 billion of the 2009 federal budget. The proposed 
fiscal year 2011 budget includes a $1.7 billion allotment to fight fraud and abuse in the 
Medicare and Medicaid systems. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1245 
In response to the enormous increase in Me dicaid fraud, the federal government has 
established departments, programs, statutes, and funds for deterring, investigating, and 
prosecuting such types of fraud.  
 



:


medicaid fraud
in 1965 presid lyndon b johnson sign the social secur act which establish
medicar and medicaid these program provid medic and healthrel servic to
specif group of peopl in the unit state both program ar manag by the center
for medicar and medicaid servic cm a feder agenc within the us depart of
health and human servic
although both medicar and medicaid provid medic and healthrel servic there ar
sever differ between the two program medicar which is fund and govern by
the feder govern is the feder health insur program for peopl ag 65 or older
and most peopl with certain disabl it is financ by social secur contribut
convers medicaid is a feder and statefund program that provid health care
coverag for lowincom famili and children medic and longterm care coverag for
peopl with disabl and assist with health and longterm care expens for low
incom senior although medicaid is a feder program it is oper by the state and
each state decid elig and the scope of coverag medicaid doe not requir recipi
to make contribut and it is financ from gener revenu
accord to the feder govern medicaid fraud involv purpos bill medicaid for
servic that were never provid or receiv
as the number of individu enrol in medi caid increas the amount of fund be
expend by these program leav the industri at a signific risk for fraudul claim
medicaid expenditur compris 216 billion of the 2009 feder budget the propos
fiscal year 2011 budget includ a 17 billion allot to fight fraud and abus in the
medicar and medicaid system
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11245
in respons to the enorm increas in me dicaid fraud the feder govern ha
establish depart program statut and fund for deter investig and
prosecut such type of fraud
