2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Introduction/Bankruptcy Court


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Bankruptcy Court 
All bankruptcy cases are filed in the local district of the United States Bankruptcy Court. 
Although bankruptcy courts are federal courts, they are not Article III courts, which derive 
their power from Article III of the Constitution. Article III states that judicial power of the 
United States rests with the Supreme Court and in inferior courts established by Congress. 
Article III courts include the U.S. District Courts, the U.S. Circuit Courts of Appeal, and the 
U.S. Supreme Court.  
 
Bankruptcy courts are not contemplated within this scheme as “inferior” courts, but they are 
considered as an adjunct to “inferior” U.S. District Courts. 
 
Likewise, bankruptcy judges are not Article III judges, which derive their power from Article 
III of the Constitution. Bankruptcy judges hear all cases involving debtors’ and creditors’ 
rights, approve plans of reorganization, award fees to professionals, and conduct hearings 
and trials when necessary to resolve disputes. 
 



:


bankruptci court
all bankruptci case ar file in the local district of the unit state bankruptci court
although bankruptci court ar feder court thei ar not articl iii court which deriv
their power from articl iii of the constitut articl iii state that judici power of the
unit state rest with the suprem court and in inferior court establish by congress
articl iii court includ the us district court the us circuit court of appeal and the
us suprem court
bankruptci court ar not contempl within thi scheme as inferior court but thei ar
consid as an adjunct to inferior us district court
likewis bankruptci judg ar not articl iii judg which deriv their power from articl
iii of the constitut bankruptci judg hear all case involv debtor and creditor
right approv plan of reorgan award fee to profession and conduct hear
and trial when necessari to resolv disput
