2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Introduction/Office of the United States Trustee


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Office of the United States Trustee  
The Office of the United States Trustee is a Department of Justice agency that is responsible 
for administering bankruptcy cases; appointing trustees, examiners, and Chapter 11 
committees; overseeing and monitoring trustees; reviewing employment and fee applications; 
and appearing in court on matters of interest to the estate and creditors.  
 
There are 21 regions in the Office of the U.S. Trustee comprising one or more federal 
districts. Each region consists of a U.S. Trustee (or an Assistant Trustee in several regions). 
The Office of the UST in each region principally is comprised of staff attorneys, bankruptcy 
analysts (including accountants) and, in some instances, special investigative units. 
 
Staff attorneys review pleadings (e.g., fee applications and motions to appoint trustees and 
examiners) and represent the UST on these matters.  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1302                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bankruptcy analysts analyze and review operating reports and other relevant financial 
information and, in general, oversee the debtor’s case to ensure compliance with the 
Bankruptcy Code and to protect the assets of the estate.  
 
Special investigative units investigate criminal referrals (complaints) in bankruptcy cases. In some 
cases they work with criminal investigative agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and the Internal Revenue Service Criminal Investigative Division. 
 



:


offic of the unit state truste
the offic of the unit state truste is a depart of justic agenc that is respons
for administ bankruptci case appoint truste examin and chapter 11
committe overse and monitor truste review employ and fee applic
and appear in court on matter of interest to the estat and creditor
there ar 21 region in the offic of the us truste compris on or more feder
district each region consist of a us truste or an assist truste in sever region
the offic of the ust in each region princip is compris of staff attornei bankruptci
analyst includ account and in some instanc special investig unit
staff attornei review plead eg fee applic and motion to appoint truste and
examin and repres the ust on these matter
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11302 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci analyst analyz and review oper report and other relev financi
inform and in gener overse the debtor case to ensur complianc with the
bankruptci code and to protect the asset of the estat
special investig unit investig crimin referr complaint in bankruptci case in some
case thei work with crimin investig agenc such as the feder bureau of
investig and the intern revenu servic crimin investig divis
