2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)/Investigation by the Trustee


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Investigation by the Trustee 
The trustee’s powers enable him to gather financial information from various sources 
including the debtor’s attorneys and accountants. A trustee steps into the shoes of the 
debtor, which allows him the opportunity to break the attorney-client privilege. Attorneys 
might attempt to raise the attorney-client privilege as a defense to providing information, but 
they are usually unsuccessful in this regard. Since the trustee is now the client, he must be 
able to understand what legal actions need to be taken. Therefore, it is imperative that the 
debtor’s attorney cooperate with the trustee. The trustee also should have access to the 
accountant’s work papers, tax returns, and client documents in their possession, which might 
provide the trustee and creditors with the opportunity to locate and recover hidden assets. 
Another useful tool in the trustee’s arsenal is the power to have access to debtor’s records 
that are in the possession of the criminal authorities. Since the trustee steps into the shoes of 
the debtor, he has the right to inspect and use these records to conduct the business affairs 
of the debtor. 
 
If the investigation uncovers sufficient evidence of fraud, the trustee should file a report 
detailing the results of the investigation with the United States Attorney. This duty is spelled 
out in Title 18, United States Code, section 3057. 
 



:


investig by the truste
the truste power enabl him to gather financi inform from variou sourc
includ the debtor attornei and account a truste step into the shoe of the
debtor which allow him the opportun to break the attorneycli privileg attornei
might attempt to rais the attorneycli privileg as a defens to provid inform but
thei ar usual unsuccess in thi regard sinc the truste is now the client he must be
abl to understand what legal action need to be taken therefor it is imper that the
debtor attornei cooper with the truste the truste also should have access to the
account work paper tax return and client document in their possess which might
provid the truste and creditor with the opportun to locat and recov hidden asset
anoth us tool in the truste arsen is the power to have access to debtor record
that ar in the possess of the crimin author sinc the truste step into the shoe of
the debtor he ha the right to inspect and us these record to conduct the busi affair
of the debtor
if the investig uncov suffici evid of fraud the truste should file a report
detail the result of the investig with the unit state attornei thi duti is spell
out in titl 18 unit state code section 3057
