2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/The Bankruptcy Code (Title 11, United States Code)/Investigative Procedures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Investigative Procedures 
To fulfill their fiduciary investigative responsibilities, trustees need to gather financial 
information. If debtor’s books and records are missing, incomplete or unreliable, they should 
be obtained from third parties such as banks, customers, related parties, and so on. If the 
third-party resists the trustee’s request, the trustee can subpoena records or testimony under 
Bankruptcy Rule 2004. After receiving third-party records and testimony, the trustee might 
then: 
• Reconstruct cash receipts and cash disbursements journals, and general ledgers. 
• Identify new bank accounts, related-party transactions, and hidden or concealed assets. 
• Take 2004 exams (depositions) of uncooperative witnesses. 
• Take 2004 exams of third-party witnesses and others who can authenticate documents, 
records, etc.  
• Obtain declaration testimony from cooperative witnesses. 
• Interview witnesses — Determine direct versus indirect knowledge of facts. Bookkeepers 
are good sources of information who can provide information regarding cash receipts 
and disbursements, related-parties transactions, and evidence regarding destruction of 
records. 
• After documentary and other evidence has been gathered and analyzed, the trustee 
should prepare an investigative report. 
• If allegations of fraud are present, file a separate report pursuant to Title 18, section 3057 
(filed with United States Attorney’s Office).   
 
 



:


investig procedur
to fulfil their fiduciari investig respons truste need to gather financi
inform if debtor book and record ar miss incomplet or unreli thei should
be obtain from third parti such as bank custom relat parti and so on if the
thirdparti resist the truste request the truste can subpoena record or testimoni under
bankruptci rule 2004 after receiv thirdparti record and testimoni the truste might
then
reconstruct cash receipt and cash disburs journal and gener ledger
identifi new bank account relatedparti transact and hidden or conceal asset
take 2004 exam deposit of uncoop wit
take 2004 exam of thirdparti wit and other who can authent document
record etc
obtain declar testimoni from cooper wit
interview wit determin direct versu indirect knowledg of fact bookkeep
ar good sourc of inform who can provid inform regard cash receipt
and disburs relatedparti transact and evid regard destruct of
record
after documentari and other evid ha been gather and analyz the truste
should prepar an investig report
if alleg of fraud ar present file a separ report pursuant to titl 18 section 3057
file with unit state attornei offic
