2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Fictitious Disbursement Schemes/TRACING PROCEDURES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


TRACING PROCEDURES  
When a suspect payment has been isolated, begin the tracing process. Remember that the 
phony payable might go directly to the recipient (deposited in a shell account), or through an 
intermediary account, person, or entity. It might even be converted to cash by the payer, and 
the cash given to the recipient. 
 
In instances where the identity of the individual recipient is not clear from the face of the 
check (as in checks payable to a business entity), do the following: 
• Examine the back of the check. Note where the check was deposited, and the account 
number, if available. If the check is not endorsed, the bank will still be able to locate the 
account to which it was deposited through its own internal records.  
• Obtain the records of the account where the check was deposited. The signature card 
and the monthly account statement will show the nominal account holder. In the case of 
business accounts, the bank should also have a copy of the corporate resolution or 
partnership agreement authorizing the account. 
• If the identity of the individual recipient is still not clear, check the public filings required 
of business entities to determine ownership. Corporate documents (articles of 
incorporation, annual reports, and some other basic documents) and limited partnerships 
might also be filed in some jurisdictions at the county level. The fictitious name index, 
business license files, telephone billing records, and even utility billing records can also 
lead to the identity of the principals.  
• If the original check is missing or has been destroyed, a microfilm copy can be obtained 
from the bank on which the check was drawn. (The bank where the check was deposited 
will also have a microfilm copy of the check. Unless the exact date of deposit and the 
identity of the depository bank are known, it will be very difficult to locate it.) 
• Payments by wire transfer or cashier’s check  can be traced to the recipient. A wire 
transfer from an account appears on that account statement as a debit memo (often 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.726                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
abbreviated as DM ). The Wire Transfer Request should show the name of the purchaser, 
the payee, and the bank and account number to which the funds were transferred. The 
sender receives a copy of this request, and the bank also maintains a copy, which is 
usually filed by date. 
• The bank’s retained copy of a cashier’s check will identify the payee. The bank also keeps 
the negotiated check when it is returned for payment. It will contain the endorsement 
and show where it was negotiated. Banks usually file cashier’s checks by number, making 
it necessary to know the approximate date they were issued to link them to the 
purchasers. Look for a cashier’s check or wire transfer on the dates of suspect cash 
withdrawals, checks to cash, or checks to the issuing bank. Remember that such 
instruments can be purchased for cash from any bank, not only from the bank where the 
payer’s account is located. 
• If the trail described above leads to an intermediary, the entire process must be repeated.  
 



:


trace procedur
when a suspect payment ha been isol begin the trace process rememb that the
phoni payabl might go directli to the recipi deposit in a shell account or through an
intermediari account person or entiti it might even be convert to cash by the payer and
the cash given to the recipi
in instanc where the ident of the individu recipi is not clear from the face of the
check as in check payabl to a busi entiti do the follow
examin the back of the check note where the check wa deposit and the account
number if avail if the check is not endors the bank will still be abl to locat the
account to which it wa deposit through it own intern record
obtain the record of the account where the check wa deposit the signatur card
and the monthli account statement will show the nomin account holder in the case of
busi account the bank should also have a copi of the corpor resolut or
partnership agreement author the account
if the ident of the individu recipi is still not clear check the public file requir
of busi entiti to determin ownership corpor document articl of
incorpor annual report and some other basic document and limit partnership
might also be file in some jurisdict at the counti level the fictiti name index
busi licens file telephon bill record and even util bill record can also
lead to the ident of the princip
if the origin check is miss or ha been destroi a microfilm copi can be obtain
from the bank on which the check wa drawn the bank where the check wa deposit
will also have a microfilm copi of the check unless the exact date of deposit and the
ident of the depositori bank ar known it will be veri difficult to locat it
payment by wire transfer or cashier check can be trace to the recipi a wire
transfer from an account appear on that account statement as a debit memo often
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1726 2011 fraud examin manual
abbrevi as dm the wire transfer request should show the name of the purchas
the paye and the bank and account number to which the fund were transfer the
sender receiv a copi of thi request and the bank also maintain a copi which is
usual file by date
the bank retain copi of a cashier check will identifi the paye the bank also keep
the negoti check when it is return for payment it will contain the endors
and show where it wa negoti bank usual file cashier check by number make
it necessari to know the approxim date thei were issu to link them to the
purchas look for a cashier check or wire transfer on the date of suspect cash
withdraw check to cash or check to the issu bank rememb that such
instrument can be purchas for cash from ani bank not onli from the bank where the
payer account is locat
if the trail describ abov lead to an intermediari the entir process must be repeat
