2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing a Report


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Preparing a Report 
Careful consideration should be given to the preparation of an expert report, which 
documents your findings and opinions for both sides. It puts your reputation on the line. A 
well-written report that lays out a strong case might even prompt an early settlement. 
However, it also lets the opposition see the strengths and weaknesses of your case and better 
prepares them for your deposition and trial testimony.  
 
Keep the following six tips in mind when preparing an expert report: 
• Be brief 
• Avoid ambiguity or inexact language 
• Avoid generalizations; be specific 
• Add charts or graphs where appropriate 
• Reference your work 
• Meticulously check the report for accuracy and neatness 
 
An important problem in the preparation of reports and accounting summaries arises from 
the delegation of tasks to subordinates. If the person giving evidence has not had direct 
knowledge or has not examined the specific documents or prepared the summaries, the expert 
might be trapped under the hearsay rule. If tasks are delegated, it is important that the review 
process entails comparison of all original work documentation. 
 
It also is important to know the effect of other assumptions on the conclusion or opinion 
reached in the report. It often is possible to trap an expert into giving alternate opinions based 
upon assumptions that had not been considered. Generally, working papers and schedules 
supporting the report should not show contradictory conclusions as they may be produced in 
court. This is not to advocate that working papers should be deleted or amended subsequent 
to preparation; rather, it is a caution that these papers should be prepared with the precept 
that they could ultimately be submitted to the court. Thus, the work papers should be 
appropriately prepared.  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.805 
Once they accept a case, many experts immediately start assembling a narrative version of the 
events. This detailed summary of the facts of the case serves as the raw material for rendering 
an official opinion. It is important that the text be written with care and professionalism — as 
the discussion below outlines, the text may (and probably will) have to be produced during 
discovery. Additionally, a well-written narrative helps the attorney in preparing and executing 
the case at trial. 
 



:


prepar a report
care consider should be given to the prepar of an expert report which
document your find and opinion for both side it put your reput on the line a
wellwritten report that lai out a strong case might even prompt an earli settlement
howev it also let the opposit see the strength and weak of your case and better
prepar them for your deposit and trial testimoni
keep the follow six tip in mind when prepar an expert report
be brief
avoid ambigu or inexact languag
avoid gener be specif
add chart or graph where appropri
refer your work
meticul check the report for accuraci and neat
an import problem in the prepar of report and account summari aris from
the deleg of task to subordin if the person give evid ha not had direct
knowledg or ha not examin the specif document or prepar the summari the expert
might be trap under the hearsai rule if task ar deleg it is import that the review
process entail comparison of all origin work document
it also is import to know the effect of other assumpt on the conclus or opinion
reach in the report it often is possibl to trap an expert into give altern opinion base
upon assumpt that had not been consid gener work paper and schedul
support the report should not show contradictori conclus as thei mai be produc in
court thi is not to advoc that work paper should be delet or amend subsequ
to prepar rather it is a caution that these paper should be prepar with the precept
that thei could ultim be submit to the court thu the work paper should be
appropri prepar
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2805
onc thei accept a case mani expert immedi start assembl a narr version of the
event thi detail summari of the fact of the case serv as the raw materi for render
an offici opinion it is import that the text be written with care and profession as
the discuss below outlin the text mai and probabl will have to be produc dure
discoveri addition a wellwritten narr help the attornei in prepar and execut
the case at trial
