2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing a Report/Expert Witness Discovery


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Expert Witness Discovery 
Concerning expert witnesses, discovery is the process by which the opposing side finds out an 
expert’s opinions and underlying rationales. Caution is the by-word for expert witnesses at 
every step of the legal process.  
 
In general, everything that a expert witness creates or uses is discoverable. According to FRCP 
26, which applies to civil cases in federal court, everything the expert receives, reviews, relies, 
produces, and says about the case after being hired is subject to discovery by opposing 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.808  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel. That means everything: narrative versions of the case, comments to the press or law 
enforcement, hypothetical reconstructions, draft reports, and even notes can be demanded 
and used by the opposing party. A shrewd attorney can use an expert’s notebook — which 
contains “dry runs” at an opinion and other purely deliberative information — to call the 
witness’s testimony into question. The only exception, as discussed below, is when the expert 
is hired by the attorney purely on a consulting basis. 
 
Because all “data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinions” is 
admissible in federal court, experts should never destroy drafts, notes, recordings, or any other 
form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion (Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, 
Rule 26(a)). 
 
In legalese, an expert witness has no privilege. The principle of privilege exists to protect certain 
core societal relationships (attorney-client, husband-wife), but the expert witness’s relationship 
with clients is not among those protected. If the expert’s opinions will be presented in court, 
everything related to the expert’s opinion is discoverable.  
 
In fact, anything an expert carries into a deposition — sworn testimony given by a party or 
witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the parties before trial and outside of court — 
is subject to discovery. Attorneys have been known to request a search of someone’s attaché 
case to get at important materials. This sharp edge of discovery is why experts insist on being 
deposed away from their own workplace; if they did not, their entire files would be subject to 
discovery.  
 



:


expert wit discoveri
concern expert wit discoveri is the process by which the oppos side find out an
expert opinion and underli rational caution is the byword for expert wit at
everi step of the legal process
in gener everyth that a expert wit creat or us is discover accord to frcp
26 which appli to civil case in feder court everyth the expert receiv review reli
produc and sai about the case after be hire is subject to discoveri by oppos
testifi as an expert wit law
2808 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel that mean everyth narr version of the case comment to the press or law
enforc hypothet reconstruct draft report and even note can be demand
and us by the oppos parti a shrewd attornei can us an expert notebook which
contain dry run at an opinion and other pure delib inform to call the
witnesss testimoni into question the onli except as discuss below is when the expert
is hire by the attornei pure on a consult basi
becaus all data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion is
admiss in feder court expert should never destroi draft note record or ani other
form of document us to form the expert opinion feder rule of civil procedur
rule 26a
in legales an expert wit ha no privileg the principl of privileg exist to protect certain
core societ relationship attorneycli husbandwif but the expert witnesss relationship
with client is not among those protect if the expert opinion will be present in court
everyth relat to the expert opinion is discover
in fact anyth an expert carri into a deposit sworn testimoni given by a parti or
wit upon question by counsel for on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court
is subject to discoveri attornei have been known to request a search of someon attach
case to get at import materi thi sharp edg of discoveri is why expert insist on be
depos awai from their own workplac if thei did not their entir file would be subject to
discoveri
