2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness 
Just what constitutes expert status? Generally, the term expert witness refers to someone 
whose education and professional credentials establish their knowledge of a particular set of 
practices. As with introducing exhibits in trial, counsel must lay a foundation for the expert’s 
testimony. This means showing that by formal education, advanced study, or experience, the 
witness is sufficiently knowledgeable on the subject at hand. That is, a witness must be 
qualified to testify as an expert. The foundation may be established during the pre-trial stage 
or during direct examination.  
 
Unfortunately, it is becoming increasingly difficult to testify in federal courts as an expert and 
to understand the standards and rules to qualify as an expert. 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.811 
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the admissibility of expert testimony in 
federal court. Rule 702 provides that a witness qualified as an expert by “knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education” may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise to 
“scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge” if such testimony will “assist the trier of 
fact to understand the evidence or to determine the fact in issue.” 
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 509 U.S. 579 (1993), the Supreme Court stated that 
judges should act as “gatekeepers” and keep out scientific testimony that is not based on the 
methods of science. In a related case titled Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999),  
the Supreme Court stated that the judge’s gate-keeping function applies not just in cases 
dealing with scientific evidence, but in any case involving testimony based on “technical” and 
“other specialized knowledge.”Taken together, these cases mean that expert testimony given 
by Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, or other experts must be judged against the 
standards set forth by the Supreme Court in the Daubert case.  
 
In response to these cases, Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence was modified to 
specifically include the standards set forth by the Supreme Court in Daubert and Kumho Tire. 
Rule 702 now reads: 
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the 
evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) 
the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable 
principles and methods, and (3) the witness has ap plied the principles and methods reliably to the 
facts of the case. 
 
Simply put, Rule 702 provides that the judge must make three determinations before allowing 
an expert to testify before the jury:  
• Is the person qualified as an expert witness?  
• Will the expertise of the witness assist the jury in understanding the evidence or 
determining a fact at issue? In other words, is  the testimony relevant to the facts of the 
case? 
• Is the testimony reliable? 
 



:


qualifi to testifi as an expert wit
just what constitut expert statu gener the term expert wit refer to someon
whose educ and profession credenti establish their knowledg of a particular set of
practic as with introduc exhibit in trial counsel must lai a foundat for the expert
testimoni thi mean show that by formal educ advanc studi or experi the
wit is suffici knowledg on the subject at hand that is a wit must be
qualifi to testifi as an expert the foundat mai be establish dure the pretrial stage
or dure direct examin
unfortun it is becom increasingli difficult to testifi in feder court as an expert and
to understand the standard and rule to qualifi as an expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2811
rule 702 of the feder rule of evid govern the admiss of expert testimoni in
feder court rule 702 provid that a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi in the form of an opinion or otherwis to
scientif technic or other special knowledg if such testimoni will assist the trier of
fact to understand the evid or to determin the fact in issu
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut 509 us 579 1993 the suprem court state that
judg should act as gatekeep and keep out scientif testimoni that is not base on the
method of scienc in a relat case titl kumho tire co v carmichael 526 us 137 1999
the suprem court state that the judg gatekeep function appli not just in case
deal with scientif evid but in ani case involv testimoni base on technic and
other special knowledgetaken togeth these case mean that expert testimoni given
by certifi fraud examin account or other expert must be judg against the
standard set forth by the suprem court in the daubert case
in respons to these case rule 702 of the feder rule of evid wa modifi to
specif includ the standard set forth by the suprem court in daubert and kumho tire
rule 702 now read
if scientif technic or other special knowledg will assist the trier of fact to understand the
evid or to determin a fact in issu a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwis if 1
the testimoni is base upon suffici fact or data 2 the testimoni is the product of reliabl
principl and method and 3 the wit ha ap pli the principl and method reliabl to the
fact of the case
simpli put rule 702 provid that the judg must make three determin befor allow
an expert to testifi befor the juri
is the person qualifi as an expert wit
will the expertis of the wit assist the juri in understand the evid or
determin a fact at issu in other word is the testimoni relev to the fact of the
case
is the testimoni reliabl
