2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness/Qualifications


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Qualifications 
Before admitting expert testimony, the judge must determine that the expert is a qualified 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.812  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
practitioner. This element addresses whether the individual is qualified to assist the trier of 
fact. For a witness to qualify as an expert, counsel must establish that the witness is sufficiently 
knowledgeable on the subject at hand by showing formal education, skill, or experience. The 
determination of whether a witness is qualified as an expert or whether expert testimony is 
needed is left to the discretion of the trial judge.  
 
The process of evaluating whether an expert is qualified mainly centers on the candidate’s 
formal education and work experience — whether that includes 30 years in law enforcement or 
10 years in a large accounting firm. But there is no particular educational requirement for 
expert testimony; a witness with no formal education may be qualified based on training or 
experience. Some other factors that may be considered include the candidate’s: 
• Awards and honors 
• Licensing or certification 
• Technical training 
• Published books and journal articles 
• Positions in professional associations, societies, and organizations 
 
In addition to being qualified as an expert, the expert’s qualifications must be relevant to the 
particular issue(s) in the case at hand. But the important thing to remember is that a person 
can be qualified as an expert based on either special training or experience. A person does not 
have to be a CFE to testify as an expert on fraud detection techniques if that person has 
sufficient practical experience in those techniques. The CFE designation is important because 
it serves as a recognition of the special skills that those holding the designation have 
demonstrated to become a CFE. 
 
Although designations are important, it is most helpful to have prior experience as an expert 
with litigation or criminal matters. This is primarily because of what is learned during the 
experience of testifying. Further, it often is helpful to have been accepted as an expert in other 
cases thereby easing current acceptance. A danger exists, however, of appearing to be a 
“professional witness.” 
 
The counsel introducing the witness often will read the expert’s qualifications or ask specific 
questions to establish the witness’s credentials. Smart defense lawyers are not likely to 
challenge the credentials of experts, assuming they meet at least minimum standards of 
professional competence. To do so may give these experts an opportunity to fully highlight 
their professional credentials and perhaps make a greater impression on the jury or judge, thus 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.813 
adding more weight to their testimony. Although the expert’s qualifications are not often 
contested, it does happen. Beyond being accepted by both parties, the expert witness most 
importantly must be accepted by the court. 
 



:


qualif
befor admit expert testimoni the judg must determin that the expert is a qualifi
testifi as an expert wit law
2812 2011 fraud examin manual
practition thi element address whether the individu is qualifi to assist the trier of
fact for a wit to qualifi as an expert counsel must establish that the wit is suffici
knowledg on the subject at hand by show formal educ skill or experi the
determin of whether a wit is qualifi as an expert or whether expert testimoni is
need is left to the discret of the trial judg
the process of evalu whether an expert is qualifi mainli center on the candid
formal educ and work experi whether that includ 30 year in law enforc or
10 year in a larg account firm but there is no particular educ requir for
expert testimoni a wit with no formal educ mai be qualifi base on train or
experi some other factor that mai be consid includ the candid
award and honor
licens or certif
technic train
publish book and journal articl
posit in profession associ societi and organ
in addit to be qualifi as an expert the expert qualif must be relev to the
particular issu in the case at hand but the import thing to rememb is that a person
can be qualifi as an expert base on either special train or experi a person doe not
have to be a cfe to testifi as an expert on fraud detect techniqu if that person ha
suffici practic experi in those techniqu the cfe design is import becaus
it serv as a recognit of the special skill that those hold the design have
demonstr to becom a cfe
although design ar import it is most help to have prior experi as an expert
with litig or crimin matter thi is primarili becaus of what is learn dure the
experi of testifi further it often is help to have been accept as an expert in other
case therebi eas current accept a danger exist howev of appear to be a
profession wit
the counsel introduc the wit often will read the expert qualif or ask specif
question to establish the witnesss credenti smart defens lawyer ar not like to
challeng the credenti of expert assum thei meet at least minimum standard of
profession compet to do so mai give these expert an opportun to fulli highlight
their profession credenti and perhap make a greater impress on the juri or judg thu
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2813
ad more weight to their testimoni although the expert qualif ar not often
contest it doe happen beyond be accept by both parti the expert wit most
importantli must be accept by the court
