2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Direct Examination/Presenting Expert Testimony


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Presenting Expert Testimony 
Expert witnesses present their findings in various ways such as narrative questions, 
hypotheticals, specialized materials, and special exhibits. Experts are commonly asked to 
answer narrative questions, which are all but forbidden to lay witnesses. Narrative questions are 
broad, open-ended questions that allow experts to present their opinions in their own words 
with minimal prompting from the lawyer. Fraud cases, with their divergent paths of activity 
and intrigue, can require complex summarizing in order for the facts to make any sense. The 
average group of jurors has never considered how someone could manipulate store 
inventories to drive up the company’s stock price and then make millions on the phony surge. 
The expert witness in cases like this often will begin testimony by recounting the narrative 
background of a case, the tests and experiments that were performed during the investigation, 
and a summary of the findings based on his professional expertise.  
 
Expert witnesses also are allowed to demonstrate their findings by using hypotheticals: fictional 
situations, analogous to the act in question, which clarify and highlight particular aspects of 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.819 
the dispute. But to be effective, hypotheticals must be constructed exquisitely. Appeals courts 
have been adamant that the facts of the case being tried have to be reflected directly in the 
hypothetical situation; there must be no exaggeration or obscuring in the presentation.  
 
Moreover, experts sometimes use specialized ma terials in reaching and communicating their 
opinions. Professional publications and sources of information that normally are used in the 
course of business may be produced as part of the trial. Federal rules require only that the 
source be “generally used and relied on” by people in that field.  
 
Finally, experts may use special exhibits to demonstrate facts about the case or some aspect of 
their opinion. These exhibits may include charts, diagrams, annotated documents, or photos. 
If the exhibit is offered to prove a fact, it must satisfy the rules applicable to any other piece of 
evidence in the case. In demonstrating a professional opinion, the role of the exhibit must be 
clear and its applicability to the present case justified, if necessary.  
 



:


present expert testimoni
expert wit present their find in variou wai such as narr question
hypothet special materi and special exhibit expert ar commonli ask to
answer narr question which ar all but forbidden to lai wit narr question ar
broad openend question that allow expert to present their opinion in their own word
with minim prompt from the lawyer fraud case with their diverg path of activ
and intrigu can requir complex summar in order for the fact to make ani sens the
averag group of juror ha never consid how someon could manipul store
inventori to drive up the compani stock price and then make million on the phoni surg
the expert wit in case like thi often will begin testimoni by recount the narr
background of a case the test and experi that were perform dure the investig
and a summari of the find base on hi profession expertis
expert wit also ar allow to demonstr their find by us hypothet fiction
situat analog to the act in question which clarifi and highlight particular aspect of
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2819
the disput but to be effect hypothet must be construct exquisit appeal court
have been adam that the fact of the case be tri have to be reflect directli in the
hypothet situat there must be no exagger or obscur in the present
moreov expert sometim us special ma terial in reach and commun their
opinion profession public and sourc of inform that normal ar us in the
cours of busi mai be produc as part of the trial feder rule requir onli that the
sourc be gener us and reli on by peopl in that field
final expert mai us special exhibit to demonstr fact about the case or some aspect of
their opinion these exhibit mai includ chart diagram annot document or photo
if the exhibit is offer to prove a fact it must satisfi the rule applic to ani other piec of
evid in the case in demonstr a profession opinion the role of the exhibit must be
clear and it applic to the present case justifi if necessari
