2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS 
 
In today’s world, computers are an integral part of fraud examination. Whether using the 
Internet in an investigation or to analyze data, it is essential that the fraud examiner have 
access to a computer and its applications. Computers contain volumes of data—financial 
data, marketing data, customer data, correspondence, and more, and evidence of fraud could 
be located within that data. Unfortunately, fraudulent data often looks like legitimate data 
when viewed in the raw. Taking a sample and testing it may not uncover fraudulent activity. 
 
Fortunately, for fraud examiners, software companies have developed computer programs 
that enable users to sift through mounds of information. These programs identify current 
customers, potential customers, and future trends within their respective industries, and can 
be configured to identify breaks in audit control programs and anomalies in accounting 
records.  
 
In general, these software programs perform two primary functions that fraud examiners use 
to explore and analyze large amounts of data: data mining and data analytics. Data mining  is 
the science of extracting information from large data sets or databases. Data analysis  refers to 
any statistical process used to analyze data. And if properly used, these processes can provide 
the ultimate system of red flags, detecting a fraudulent situation long before previously 
possible. 
 
 



:


data analysi and report tool
in todai world comput ar an integr part of fraud examin whether us the
internet in an investig or to analyz data it is essenti that the fraud examin have
access to a comput and it applic comput contain volum of datafinanci
data market data custom data correspond and more and evid of fraud could
be locat within that data unfortun fraudul data often look like legitim data
when view in the raw take a sampl and test it mai not uncov fraudul activ
fortun for fraud examin softwar compani have develop comput program
that enabl user to sift through mound of inform these program identifi current
custom potenti custom and futur trend within their respect industri and can
be configur to identifi break in audit control program and anomali in account
record
in gener these softwar program perform two primari function that fraud examin us
to explor and analyz larg amount of data data mine and data analyt data mine is
the scienc of extract inform from larg data set or databas data analysi refer to
ani statist process us to analyz data and if properli us these process can provid
the ultim system of red flag detect a fraudul situat long befor previous
possibl
