2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software/Fraud Detection Techniques for Revenue/AGE RECEIVABLES, EXTRACT OLDER BALANCES, AND SUMMARIZE BY CUSTOMER


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


AGE RECEIVABLES, EXTRACT OLDER BALANCES, AND SUMMARIZE BY CUSTOMER 
This test mainly recalculates the aging of the invoices in the accounts receivable ledger for 
review against the company-derived report. Any differences between this calculation and the 
report used by management may be due to a system error, a poorly designed report, or fraud. 
To orchestrate fraud, management may hide the true payment patterns of customers to 
minimize their bad debt valuation reserve at year end. 
 
The aging report should be reconciled to the organization’s accounts receivable aging report. 
Any differences should be investigated. One approach is to extract a sampling of invoices 
(see previous test on reviewing a sample of invoices) within a specific aging group and 
reconcile to the aging report on an invoice by invoice basis. This work may identify report 
errors or an attempt by the organization to hide the true aging of accounts receivable.  
The focus of test work should be on more current aging categories that may be 
inappropriately inflated. 
 
Once the invoices are summarized by customer, the aging report also highlights customer 
balances, older than a pre-defined “old” limit. This may be 180 or 270 days after which 
payment of such invoices is unlikely. Large customer balances could be reviewed with 
management as to their collectability and, possibly, with the actual customer. This analysis 
would further support the year-end bad debt reserve calculation. 
 



:


ag receiv extract older balanc and summar by custom
thi test mainli recalcul the ag of the invoic in the account receiv ledger for
review against the companyderiv report ani differ between thi calcul and the
report us by manag mai be due to a system error a poorli design report or fraud
to orchestr fraud manag mai hide the true payment pattern of custom to
minim their bad debt valuat reserv at year end
the ag report should be reconcil to the organ account receiv ag report
ani differ should be investig on approach is to extract a sampl of invoic
see previou test on review a sampl of invoic within a specif ag group and
reconcil to the ag report on an invoic by invoic basi thi work mai identifi report
error or an attempt by the organ to hide the true ag of account receiv
the focu of test work should be on more current ag categori that mai be
inappropri inflat
onc the invoic ar summar by custom the ag report also highlight custom
balanc older than a predefin old limit thi mai be 180 or 270 dai after which
payment of such invoic is unlik larg custom balanc could be review with
manag as to their collect and possibl with the actual custom thi analysi
would further support the yearend bad debt reserv calcul
