2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Reporting and Case Management Software/Indexer


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Indexer 
Indexer is a text extraction program that clearly and automatically reveals critical connections 
between information stored in a database. Indexer automatically extracts relevant 
information from unstructured text using entities (such as a person, company, or an event), 
attributes (such as occupation, sex, or company title), and relationships (such as located at, 
works for, and involved in event). Xanalys provides various ways to ensure that the 
information represented in the Index Plan is useful. These include loading them into a 
database for analysis by Link Explorer or other reporting or analysis tools, in addition to 
embedding the technology into third-party applications. With the key entities and 
relationships contained in a structured environment, it is now possible to access and query 
this information. Once a number of documents have been processed, a list of all the people 
mentioned in the documents or a list of companies, vehicles, or phone numbers associated 
with those listed people could be obtained. As new documents arrive, these can be 
incorporated and augment the existing results. The full power of Indexer capabilities can be 
embedded into a company’s own products and technologies. On the Windows platform, it 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.640   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
includes a COM interface to direct the information extraction output into any required form, 
such as input to some other process or to a database. 
 
For more information on Link Explorer or Indexer, visit www.xanalys.com.  
 



:


index
index is a text extract program that clearli and automat reveal critic connect
between inform store in a databas index automat extract relev
inform from unstructur text us entiti such as a person compani or an event
attribut such as occup sex or compani titl and relationship such as locat at
work for and involv in event xanali provid variou wai to ensur that the
inform repres in the index plan is us these includ load them into a
databas for analysi by link explor or other report or analysi tool in addit to
embed the technolog into thirdparti applic with the kei entiti and
relationship contain in a structur environ it is now possibl to access and queri
thi inform onc a number of document have been process a list of all the peopl
mention in the document or a list of compani vehicl or phone number associ
with those list peopl could be obtain as new document arriv these can be
incorpor and augment the exist result the full power of index capabl can be
embed into a compani own product and technolog on the window platform it
data analysi and report tool investig
3640 2011 fraud examin manual
includ a com interfac to direct the inform extract output into ani requir form
such as input to some other process or to a databas
for more inform on link explor or index visit wwwxanalyscom
