2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Principal Types of Fraud/Illegal Gratuity


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Illegal Gratuity 
Illegal gratuities are similar to bribery schemes. In fact, under the federal legislation governing 
the offenses of bribery and illegal gratuity (Title 18 U.S. Code Section 201), an illegal gratuity 
is a lesser-included offense of official bribery. The elements of an illegal gratuity are:  
• Giving or receiving 
• A thing of value 
• For or because of 
• An official act 
 
The big difference between a bribe and an illegal gratuity is that an illegal gratuity charge 
does not require proof that the gratuity was given for the purpose of influencing an official 
act. In other words, an illegal gratuity charge only requires that the gratuity be given for or 
because of an official act.  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.207 
In the typical illegal gratuities scenario, a decision is made which happens to benefit a certain 
person or company. The party who benefited from the decision then gives a gift to the 
person who made the decision. The gifts are merely offered as a “thank you” for something 
that has been done. 
 
The federal statute governing the illegal gratuity offense prohibits a public official from 
accepting any payment of money or thing of value other than his lawful compensation. In 
practice, the statute often is applied when relatively small payments, such as gifts or 
entertainment, are used to attempt to influence a public official. 
 



:


illeg gratuiti
illeg gratuiti ar similar to briberi scheme in fact under the feder legisl govern
the offens of briberi and illeg gratuiti titl 18 us code section 201 an illeg gratuiti
is a lesserinclud offens of offici briberi the element of an illeg gratuiti ar
give or receiv
a thing of valu
for or becaus of
an offici act
the big differ between a bribe and an illeg gratuiti is that an illeg gratuiti charg
doe not requir proof that the gratuiti wa given for the purpos of influenc an offici
act in other word an illeg gratuiti charg onli requir that the gratuiti be given for or
becaus of an offici act
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2207
in the typic illeg gratuiti scenario a decis is made which happen to benefit a certain
person or compani the parti who benefit from the decis then give a gift to the
person who made the decis the gift ar mere offer as a thank you for someth
that ha been done
the feder statut govern the illeg gratuiti offens prohibit a public offici from
accept ani payment of monei or thing of valu other than hi law compens in
practic the statut often is appli when rel small payment such as gift or
entertain ar us to attempt to influenc a public offici
