2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Modifications to the False Claims Act


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Modifications to the False Claims Act 
In addition to the modifications of criminal law, FERA enacts several changes to the civil 
False Claims Act (FCA), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729–37 33, which increase the potential for liability 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.230  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
under the Act. Among other significant changes, FERA amends the FCA in the following 
ways:  
• FERA eliminates the requirement that a false claim be presented to a federal official or 
that it directly involve federal funds. Before FERA, the FCA required that allegedly false 
claims for payment be presented directly to an officer or employee of the government. 
In addition, the legislation broadens the definition of a “claim” under the FCA to include 
any request or demand for property, even if the United States does not have title to the 
money or property.  
• FERA also reduces the intent required to establish liability under section 3729(a) by 
removing the to get language from the statute. By removing the words to get, FERA 
overturns the Supreme Court’s 2008 holding in Allison Engine Co. v. United States that a 
defendant must intend to get a false claim paid by the government. As a result, liability can 
attach even if the defendant did not intend to get a false claim paid by the government.  
• Additionally, FERA enhanced the whistleblower protections under the FCA, which 
allows employees to seek relief against their employer if they are retaliated against for 
whistleblowing. FERA now makes these retaliation claims available to government 
contractors and agents.   
 



:


modif to the fals claim act
in addit to the modif of crimin law fera enact sever chang to the civil
fals claim act fca 31 usc 372937 33 which increas the potenti for liabil
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2230 2011 fraud examin manual
under the act among other signific chang fera amend the fca in the follow
wai
fera elimin the requir that a fals claim be present to a feder offici or
that it directli involv feder fund befor fera the fca requir that allegedli fals
claim for payment be present directli to an offic or employe of the govern
in addit the legisl broaden the definit of a claim under the fca to includ
ani request or demand for properti even if the unit state doe not have titl to the
monei or properti
fera also reduc the intent requir to establish liabil under section 3729a by
remov the to get languag from the statut by remov the word to get fera
overturn the suprem court 2008 hold in allison engin co v unit state that a
defend must intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern as a result liabil can
attach even if the defend did not intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern
addition fera enhanc the whistleblow protect under the fca which
allow employe to seek relief against their employ if thei ar retali against for
whistleblow fera now make these retali claim avail to govern
contractor and agent
