2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act/ENFORCEMENT OF THE ACCOUNTING PROVISIONS


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


ENFORCEMENT OF THE ACCOUNTING PROVISIONS  
The FCPA’s accounting provisions are enforced by both the SEC and the DOJ. The SEC 
has authority to initiate civil enforcement actions and can impose civil fines and 
disgorgement on the company and individuals. The SEC has brought enforcement actions of 
the accounting provisions both in cases involving actual foreign bribes and in domestic 
transactions. The SEC can seek civil penalties of up to $500,000 for covered entities and 
$100,000 for individuals. 
 
The DOJ is responsible for criminal prosecution of “willful” violations  of the accounting 
provisions, and criminal penalties can include large fines and imprisonment. A willful 
violation of the accounting and controls provision is punishable by a fine up to $25 million 
against entities, and a fine up to $5 million and imprisonment up to 20 years against 
individuals. 
 
Natural persons convicted of willful violations of the accounting provisions may be fined up  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.254  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to $5 million, imprisoned up to 20 years, or both. Corporations convicted of willful 
violations may be fined up to $25 million. Also, the FCPA provides that an individual may 
be held criminally liable for “knowingly” falsifying any book, records, or account, or 
circumventing or failing to implement a system of internal accounting controls. Knowing 
may include willful blindness or conscious attempts not to know. But no criminal liability is 
imposed for technical or insignificant accounting errors.  
 
In addition, administrative and civil relief also is available. A corporation or individual found 
in violation of the FCPA may be subject to debarment before many government agencies, 
and an indictment under the FCPA can also lead to the suspension of one’s right to do 
business with the government or the immediate suspension of export licenses for military 
defense equipment. 
 



:


enforc of the account provis
the fcpa account provis ar enforc by both the sec and the doj the sec
ha author to initi civil enforc action and can impos civil fine and
disgorg on the compani and individu the sec ha brought enforc action of
the account provis both in case involv actual foreign bribe and in domest
transact the sec can seek civil penalti of up to 500000 for cover entiti and
100000 for individu
the doj is respons for crimin prosecut of will violat of the account
provis and crimin penalti can includ larg fine and imprison a will
violat of the account and control provis is punish by a fine up to 25 million
against entiti and a fine up to 5 million and imprison up to 20 year against
individu
natur person convict of will violat of the account provis mai be fine up
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2254 2011 fraud examin manual
to 5 million imprison up to 20 year or both corpor convict of will
violat mai be fine up to 25 million also the fcpa provid that an individu mai
be held crimin liabl for knowingli falsifi ani book record or account or
circumv or fail to implement a system of intern account control know
mai includ will blind or consciou attempt not to know but no crimin liabil is
impos for technic or insignific account error
in addit administr and civil relief also is avail a corpor or individu found
in violat of the fcpa mai be subject to debar befor mani govern agenc
and an indict under the fcpa can also lead to the suspens of on right to do
busi with the govern or the immedi suspens of export licens for militari
defens equip
