2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/False Claims and Statements Statutes/CRIMINAL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 287)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


CRIMINAL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 287) 
Frequently referred to as the Criminal False Claims Act, section 287 makes it illegal to 
present or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim against any agency or department of 
the United States. The crime is complete when the claim is presented and payment of the 
claim is not an element of the offense.  
 
CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (31 U. S.C. § 3729 et seq.) 
The Civil False Claims Act is the civil counterpart to the Criminal False Claims Act. It 
provides a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal 
prosecution. As a result, the submission of a false claim to the government can make a 
contractor liable to the government, both criminally and civilly. 
 
The False Claims Act provides in part that a person who commits the following acts is liable 
to the government for any treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 
per false claim. 
 
In addition to allowing the government to recover penalties and damages for false claims, 
the Civil False Claims Act allows a private party to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a qui tam action and is discussed 
in further detail below.  
 



:


crimin fals claim act 18 usc 287
frequent refer to as the crimin fals claim act section 287 make it illeg to
present or make ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim against ani agenc or depart of
the unit state the crime is complet when the claim is present and payment of the
claim is not an element of the offens
civil fals claim act 31 u sc 3729 et seq
the civil fals claim act is the civil counterpart to the crimin fals claim act it
provid a separ civil caus of action that mai be taken in addit to a crimin
prosecut as a result the submiss of a fals claim to the govern can make a
contractor liabl to the govern both crimin and civilli
the fals claim act provid in part that a person who commit the follow act is liabl
to the govern for ani trebl damag it sustain and a civil penalti of 5000 to 10000
per fals claim
in addit to allow the govern to recov penalti and damag for fals claim
the civil fals claim act allow a privat parti to prosecut a civil action against the
perpetr on behalf of the govern thi is call a qui tam action and is discuss
in further detail below
