2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Identifying and Protecting Trade Secrets


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Identifying and Protecting Trade Secrets 
In addition to recognizing ownership rights in material possessions, U.S. law grants rights in 
intangible property. Intellectual property rights create incentives for individuals, companies, 
and investors to allocate the requisite resources to research, develop, and market original 
technology and creative works. Federal law protects intellectual property in four specific 
areas: copyright, trademark, patent, and trades ecrets. Trade secrets will be the focus of this 
section.  
 
Protection against trade secret theft, also known as economic and corporate espionage, 
involves implementing and increasing controls, as well as establishing defenses to trade 
secret intrusion. Trade secrets include, but are not limited to, customer lists, vendor 
contracts, blueprints and construction plans, bidding systems, computer programs, test data, 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.320  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
pricing information, recipes, marketing plans, manufacturing processes, and business forms. 
Essentially, any idea or information that gives its owner an advantage over its competitors 
can be classified as a trade secret, as long as it generally meets the two criteria set forth 
below. 
 
To qualify as a trade secret, information must generally meet two criteria. First, it must 
actually be a “secret.” In other words, a company cannot sue an employee or competitor for 
releasing information that was already well known and readily available. Second, 
organizations are required to take reasonable steps to protect their trade secrets from 
disclosure. Trade secret protection for a piece of information will not exist where the 
information has been publicly disclosed or where the organization that owns the secret has 
not taken adequate steps to protect it from disclosure. 
 
Organizations and individuals can maintain legal protection over trade secrets by taking 
reasonable steps to keep all proprietary information secret. It is imperative that plans are 
developed to reasonably guard trade secrets from disclosure. The use of nondisclosure and 
noncompetition agreements can provide employers with legal recourse against those who 
misappropriate proprietary information.  
 
Nondisclosure agreements typically stipulate that all trade secrets and other proprietary or 
confidential information shall be kept confidential without disclosure to anyone. These 
agreements should be signed at the outset and upon termination of employment. 
Noncompetition agreements generally forbid a current employee from working for 
competing companies within a certain period from termination. Many state courts void such 
agreements as against “public policy” because they limit future employment of a person. 
Those states that do allow noncompetition agreements require the agreement to be part of 
an otherwise valid employment agreement. However, in cases where an employee is hired “at 
will,” noncompetition agreements are unenforceable. 
 
Congress has recognized the sanctity of trade secrets in numerous statutes. This section will 
provide an overview of the most relevant legal instruments developed to combat this form 
of white-collar crime. Specifically, this section will examine the following federal legislation: 
• Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1831–1839) 
• Disclosing government trade secrets (18 U.S.C. § 1905) 
• Interstate transportation and receipt of stolen property or goods (18 U.S.C. § 2314) 
• Mail or wire fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.321 
• Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)) 
 
In addition, this section will examine the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA).  
 



:


identifi and protect trade secret
in addit to recogn ownership right in materi possess us law grant right in
intang properti intellectu properti right creat incent for individu compani
and investor to alloc the requisit resourc to research develop and market origin
technolog and creativ work feder law protect intellectu properti in four specif
area copyright trademark patent and trade ecret trade secret will be the focu of thi
section
protect against trade secret theft also known as econom and corpor espionag
involv implement and increas control as well as establish defens to trade
secret intrus trade secret includ but ar not limit to custom list vendor
contract blueprint and construct plan bid system comput program test data
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2320 2011 fraud examin manual
price inform recip market plan manufactur process and busi form
essenti ani idea or inform that give it owner an advantag over it competitor
can be classifi as a trade secret as long as it gener meet the two criteria set forth
below
to qualifi as a trade secret inform must gener meet two criteria first it must
actual be a secret in other word a compani cannot sue an employe or competitor for
releas inform that wa alreadi well known and readili avail second
organ ar requir to take reason step to protect their trade secret from
disclosur trade secret protect for a piec of inform will not exist where the
inform ha been publicli disclos or where the organ that own the secret ha
not taken adequ step to protect it from disclosur
organ and individu can maintain legal protect over trade secret by take
reason step to keep all proprietari inform secret it is imper that plan ar
develop to reason guard trade secret from disclosur the us of nondisclosur and
noncompetit agreement can provid employ with legal recours against those who
misappropri proprietari inform
nondisclosur agreement typic stipul that all trade secret and other proprietari or
confidenti inform shall be kept confidenti without disclosur to anyon these
agreement should be sign at the outset and upon termin of employ
noncompetit agreement gener forbid a current employe from work for
compet compani within a certain period from termin mani state court void such
agreement as against public polici becaus thei limit futur employ of a person
those state that do allow noncompetit agreement requir the agreement to be part of
an otherwis valid employ agreement howev in case where an employe is hire at
will noncompetit agreement ar unenforc
congress ha recogn the sanctiti of trade secret in numer statut thi section will
provid an overview of the most relev legal instrument develop to combat thi form
of whitecollar crime specif thi section will examin the follow feder legisl
econom espionag act of 1996 18 usc 18311839
disclos govern trade secret 18 usc 1905
interst transport and receipt of stolen properti or good 18 usc 2314
mail or wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2321
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a
in addit thi section will examin the uniform trade secret act utsa
