2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/The Uniform Trade Secrets Act


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


The Uniform Trade Secrets Act 
The Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA) was promulgated by the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws in 1979. The UTSA is not a federal law, but several 
states have adopted versions of it in an effort to protect trade secrets. The UTSA protects 
against the theft of “formulas, patterns, compilations, programs, devices, methods, 
techniques, and processes” of information.  
 
Companies attempting to show that a competitor has misappropriated a trade secret under 
the UTSA must satisfy a two-pronged test:  
• It must be demonstrated that the company owned a “trade secret.” 
• The company must prove that the defendant used the trade secret in breach of “an 
agreement, a confidential relationship or duty, or as a result of discovery by improper 
means.” 
 
For information to qualify as a trade secret under the UTSA, the owner of the information 
must show that:  
• The information derived independent economic value from its secrecy. 
• Efforts must have been taken to keep the information secret. The UTSA does not 
require the trade secret to have been used in business. 
 
The information does not have to derive actual independent value from its secrecy; it is 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.326  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
enough if there is potential economic value because of the information being kept secret. 
Thus, for plans or innovations that have not yet been put into effect by a company, the 
UTSA would still provide protection. The second prong of the definition once again 
mandates that organizations take reasonable steps to guard their secrets. If information is 
not treated as a secret by its owner, the organization cannot later seek protection under the UTSA.  
 
The UTSA defines a misappropriation of a trade secret as either:  
• The acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows or has reason to 
know that the trade secret was acquired by improper means 
• Disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent by a 
person who used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret or at the time 
of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know that it was a protected trade secret 
 
The term improper means includes such things as theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach of a 
duty to maintain secrecy, or espionage through electronic or other means. Note that the 
UTSA not only proscribes the stealing of a trade secret, but also the use of that trade secret 
by those who know it was stolen, whether they participated in the theft or not.  
 
Because the UTSA is not a federal law, it has fallen prey to certain difficulties. First, the fact 
that the UTSA was adopted in different versions by different states creates inconsistencies in 
the interpretation of its provisions. Second, the UTSA is not a criminal statute. The lack of 
criminal sanctions for violations of the UTSA takes some of the teeth out of its attempts to 
deter the theft of trade secrets. These are problems that Congress sought to rectify with the 
passage of the Economic Espionage Act. 
 



:


the uniform trade secret act
the uniform trade secret act utsa wa promulg by the nation confer of
commission on uniform state law in 1979 the utsa is not a feder law but sever
state have adopt version of it in an effort to protect trade secret the utsa protect
against the theft of formula pattern compil program devic method
techniqu and process of inform
compani attempt to show that a competitor ha misappropri a trade secret under
the utsa must satisfi a twoprong test
it must be demonstr that the compani own a trade secret
the compani must prove that the defend us the trade secret in breach of an
agreement a confidenti relationship or duti or as a result of discoveri by improp
mean
for inform to qualifi as a trade secret under the utsa the owner of the inform
must show that
the inform deriv independ econom valu from it secreci
effort must have been taken to keep the inform secret the utsa doe not
requir the trade secret to have been us in busi
the inform doe not have to deriv actual independ valu from it secreci it is
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2326 2011 fraud examin manual
enough if there is potenti econom valu becaus of the inform be kept secret
thu for plan or innov that have not yet been put into effect by a compani the
utsa would still provid protect the second prong of the definit onc again
mandat that organ take reason step to guard their secret if inform is
not treat as a secret by it owner the organ cannot later seek protect under the utsa
the utsa defin a misappropri of a trade secret as either
the acquisit of a trade secret of anoth by a person who know or ha reason to
know that the trade secret wa acquir by improp mean
disclosur or us of a trade secret of anoth without express or impli consent by a
person who us improp mean to acquir knowledg of the trade secret or at the time
of disclosur or us knew or had reason to know that it wa a protect trade secret
the term improp mean includ such thing as theft briberi misrepresent breach of a
duti to maintain secreci or espionag through electron or other mean note that the
utsa not onli proscrib the steal of a trade secret but also the us of that trade secret
by those who know it wa stolen whether thei particip in the theft or not
becaus the utsa is not a feder law it ha fallen prei to certain difficulti first the fact
that the utsa wa adopt in differ version by differ state creat inconsist in
the interpret of it provis second the utsa is not a crimin statut the lack of
crimin sanction for violat of the utsa take some of the teeth out of it attempt to
deter the theft of trade secret these ar problem that congress sought to rectifi with the
passag of the econom espionag act
