2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/The Bank Secrecy Act


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


The Bank Secrecy Act 
The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which went into effect in 1970, was the first major piece of 
legislation aimed at detecting and preventing money laundering. Congress enacted the BSA 
to monitor financial transactions, and the Act sets forth a system of reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements designed to help track large or unusual financial transactions. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.327 
The BSA, which is enforced by the Treasury Department, consists of two titles. Title I 
contains provisions requiring that financial institutions and securities brokers and dealers 
keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of their customers. It is codified in 
Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 1829b and 1951–1959. The penalties for 
failure to comply with these recordkeeping requirements are severe. Any insured depository 
institution and any director, officer, or employee who willfully or through gross negligence 
violates any regulation can be subject to a $10,000 civil penalty. The statute further provides 
that a separate violation occurs for each day the violation continues and at each office, branch, 
or place of business at which the violation occurs. If a violation is committed in furtherance 
of a felony crime, criminal penalties can be imposed of up to five years in prison and/or a 
fine of not more than $10,000. 
 
Title II of the BSA (originally entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act) 
requires banks, “financial institutions” (which in clude casinos, securities brokers and dealers, 
currency exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to report to the government 
certain transactions. Title II is codified at 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5333. Title II sets forth civil 
and criminal penalties for noncompliance.  
 



:


the bank secreci act
the bank secreci act bsa which went into effect in 1970 wa the first major piec of
legisl aim at detect and prevent monei launder congress enact the bsa
to monitor financi transact and the act set forth a system of report and
recordkeep requir design to help track larg or unusu financi transact
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2327
the bsa which is enforc by the treasuri depart consist of two titl titl i
contain provis requir that financi institut and secur broker and dealer
keep extens record of the transact and account of their custom it is codifi in
titl 12 of the unit state code usc section 1829b and 19511959 the penalti for
failur to compli with these recordkeep requir ar sever ani insur depositori
institut and ani director offic or employe who willfulli or through gross neglig
violat ani regul can be subject to a 10000 civil penalti the statut further provid
that a separ violat occur for each dai the violat continu and at each offic branch
or place of busi at which the violat occur if a violat is commit in further
of a feloni crime crimin penalti can be impos of up to five year in prison andor a
fine of not more than 10000
titl ii of the bsa origin entitl currenc and foreign transact report act
requir bank financi institut which in clude casino secur broker and dealer
currenc exchang and other and in some case individu to report to the govern
certain transact titl ii is codifi at 31 usc 53115333 titl ii set forth civil
and crimin penalti for noncompli
