2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes/Civil Rights Act of 1871


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Civil Rights Act of 1871 
Civil rights are rights that the U.S. government has guaranteed and protected. Although the 
Civil Rights Acts refer to several federal statutes that allow individuals whose civil rights 
have been violated to sue their violator(s), this section will examine the anti-retaliation 
protections under section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code.  
 
Where state action is involved, a whistleblower may be able to bring a claim under section 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.346  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
1983, which allows individuals to bring a claim against state actors, acting under color of 
state or local law, alleging a depravation of civil rights guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution or 
federal law. Section 1983 actions may be brought in either federal or state court. States also 
have jurisdiction to hear section 1983 cases. However, if the plaintiff does bring suit in state 
court, the defendant has the right to remove the case to federal court. In a related matter, the 
statute of limitations for claims brought under section 1983 is selected from the law of the 
forum state.  
 
Damages under section 1983 are generally determined according to damages awarded in 
common law tort actions; therefore, the damages that courts may award under section 1983 
include actual or compensatory damages, nominal damages, and punitive damages.  
 
Generally, section 1983 claims brought by public employees concerning whistleblower 
protections allege retaliation in violation of the First Amendment, which provides 
whistleblower protection for public employees that comment on matters of public concern 
that trump an employer’s interest in an efficient workplace. However, in Garcetti v. Ceballos, 
547 U.S. 410 (2006), the Supreme Court limited the extent of First Amendment 
whistleblower protections for government employees, ruling that there is no protection for 
government employees that make disclosures of wrongdoing while in the course of their 
normal job duties. 
 



:


civil right act of 1871
civil right ar right that the us govern ha guarante and protect although the
civil right act refer to sever feder statut that allow individu whose civil right
have been violat to sue their violat thi section will examin the antiretali
protect under section 1983 of titl 42 us code
where state action is involv a whistleblow mai be abl to bring a claim under section
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2346 2011 fraud examin manual
1983 which allow individu to bring a claim against state actor act under color of
state or local law alleg a deprav of civil right guarante by the us constitut or
feder law section 1983 action mai be brought in either feder or state court state also
have jurisdict to hear section 1983 case howev if the plaintiff doe bring suit in state
court the defend ha the right to remov the case to feder court in a relat matter the
statut of limit for claim brought under section 1983 is select from the law of the
forum state
damag under section 1983 ar gener determin accord to damag award in
common law tort action therefor the damag that court mai award under section 1983
includ actual or compensatori damag nomin damag and punit damag
gener section 1983 claim brought by public employe concern whistleblow
protect alleg retali in violat of the first amend which provid
whistleblow protect for public employe that comment on matter of public concern
that trump an employ interest in an effici workplac howev in garcetti v ceballo
547 us 410 2006 the suprem court limit the extent of first amend
whistleblow protect for govern employe rule that there is no protect for
govern employe that make disclosur of wrongdo while in the cours of their
normal job duti
