2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud/Construction Loans/DRAW REQUESTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


DRAW REQUESTS 
Construction loan advances are generally supported by draw requests. A draw request is the 
documentation substantiating that a developer has incurred the appropriate construction 
expenses and is now seeking reimbursement or direct payment. A typical fraud scheme in 
this area involves requesting advances on the loan for inappropriate costs, such as personal 
expenses and/or construction costs for an unrelated project. Draw requests provide the 
greatest opportunity for a developer to commit fraud against the lender because the lender 
relies upon the developer’s documentation. 
 
Generally, a draw request or pay application is made once a month and is submitted on a 
standard form such as the one promulgated by the American Institute of Architects (AIA). 
The request should be accompanied by the following documents: 
• Paid invoices for raw materials 
• Lien releases from each subcontractor 
• Inspection reports 
• Canceled checks from previous draw requests 
• Bank reconciliation for construction draw account for previous month 
• Loan balancing form, demonstrating that the loan remains in balance 
• Change orders, if applicable 
• Wiring instructions, if applicable 
• Proof of developer contribution, if applicable 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.907 
The documentation required as support for each draw request will vary depending on the 
payment method (such as direct, dual payment, disbursing agent, wire transfer, or 
reimbursement). Any missing or altered documentation is a red flag that something is amiss 
with the draw request. All advances on the loan should be adequately documented. 
 
Some or all of the following steps should be performed before advancing funds on a 
construction loan. These steps are not represented as being all-inclusive, but rather the 
preliminary disbursement questions that the disbursing party should address. 
• Examine the draw and determine if sufficient supporting documentation has been 
submitted. 
• Reconcile the amounts requested with the approved budget. Account for any 
differences. 
• Determine that the amounts requested have been properly inspected and approved. 
• Determine if the proper lien releases have been submitted for work performed. 
• Reconcile any change orders with the approved budget. Determine if the change orders 
have been approved. 
• Prove the clerical accuracy of the documentation submitted. 
• Ensure that work completed has been inspected by the lender’s architect/engineer. 
• Determine if there are any requests for soft (nonconstruction) costs and whether they 
are appropriate. 
• Determine if there are any budget changes. If so, what are they for? Have they been 
approved? 
• Prepare a cost to complete estimate to determine that the loan remains in balance. 
• If tenant improvement funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed lease 
on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the lease? Has the 
lease been approved? 
• If homeowner option funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed 
purchase contract on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the 
contract? Has the contract/purchaser been approved? 
• Examine payment requests and determine if there are new or previously undisclosed 
subcontractors. If so, determine why. 
• Ensure that the title update has been received. 
 



:


draw request
construct loan advanc ar gener support by draw request a draw request is the
document substanti that a develop ha incur the appropri construct
expens and is now seek reimburs or direct payment a typic fraud scheme in
thi area involv request advanc on the loan for inappropri cost such as person
expens andor construct cost for an unrel project draw request provid the
greatest opportun for a develop to commit fraud against the lender becaus the lender
reli upon the develop document
gener a draw request or pai applic is made onc a month and is submit on a
standard form such as the on promulg by the american institut of architect aia
the request should be accompani by the follow document
paid invoic for raw materi
lien releas from each subcontractor
inspect report
cancel check from previou draw request
bank reconcili for construct draw account for previou month
loan balanc form demonstr that the loan remain in balanc
chang order if applic
wire instruct if applic
proof of develop contribut if applic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1907
the document requir as support for each draw request will vari depend on the
payment method such as direct dual payment disburs agent wire transfer or
reimburs ani miss or alter document is a red flag that someth is amiss
with the draw request all advanc on the loan should be adequ document
some or all of the follow step should be perform befor advanc fund on a
construct loan these step ar not repres as be allinclus but rather the
preliminari disburs question that the disburs parti should address
examin the draw and determin if suffici support document ha been
submit
reconcil the amount request with the approv budget account for ani
differ
determin that the amount request have been properli inspect and approv
determin if the proper lien releas have been submit for work perform
reconcil ani chang order with the approv budget determin if the chang order
have been approv
prove the cleric accuraci of the document submit
ensur that work complet ha been inspect by the lender architectengin
determin if there ar ani request for soft nonconstruct cost and whether thei
ar appropri
determin if there ar ani budget chang if so what ar thei for have thei been
approv
prepar a cost to complet estim to determin that the loan remain in balanc
if tenant improv fund have been request establish that there is a sign leas
on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the leas ha the
leas been approv
if homeown option fund have been request establish that there is a sign
purchas contract on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the
contract ha the contractpurchas been approv
examin payment request and determin if there ar new or previous undisclos
subcontractor if so determin why
ensur that the titl updat ha been receiv
