2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Real Estate Fraud/Valuation Methods/THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH 
Under this approach, the property value is based on its capacity to continue producing 
income. This method is particularly valuable for the valuation of complex commercial 
properties. The net income the property produces is an important consideration. Net income 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.918                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
is the amount of money over the remaining life of the property and its improvements that a 
fully informed person, using good management, is warranted in receiving. 
 
Income capitalization is the mathematical process of estimating the present value of income 
property based on the anticipated annual net income it will produce. Key to the application 
of this approach is the capitalization rate that is used. There are three types of capitalization 
rates: interest rate, recapture rate,  and overall capitalization rate.  Interest rate is the rate of return 
earned on investment capital. Recapture rate is the rate of return originally invested funds 
provided the owner. Overall capitalization rate is a combination of the interest and recapture 
rates. 
 



:


the incom capit approach
under thi approach the properti valu is base on it capac to continu produc
incom thi method is particularli valuabl for the valuat of complex commerci
properti the net incom the properti produc is an import consider net incom
financi institut fraud financi transact
1918 2011 fraud examin manual
is the amount of monei over the remain life of the properti and it improv that a
fulli inform person us good manag is warrant in receiv
incom capit is the mathemat process of estim the present valu of incom
properti base on the anticip annual net incom it will produc kei to the applic
of thi approach is the capit rate that is us there ar three type of capit
rate interest rate recaptur rate and overal capit rate interest rate is the rate of return
earn on invest capit recaptur rate is the rate of return origin invest fund
provid the owner overal capit rate is a combin of the interest and recaptur
rate
