2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Straw Buyers


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Straw Buyers  
Straw buyers  are loan applicants who mortgage fraud perpetrators use to obtain home loans 
but who have no intention to occupy the properties they are buying or to pay back the loan. 
Perpetrators often use straw buyers to hide the identity of the true borrower that did not 
qualify for the mortgage.  
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.922                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following red flags may occur in a straw borrower transaction:  
• At closing, discovering that the check is from someone other than the party to the 
contract.  
• Borrower resides in different state than purchasing property, which is described as a 
primary residence. 
• Quit claim deed is used very close to loan closing. 
• Investment property represented as owner-occupied. 
• A third-party signed on the borrower’s behalf. 
• Names added to purchase contract. 
• Parties to the transaction are related. 
• There is no sales agent involved. 
• There are indications that the property seller defaulted. 
• Existence of a high FICO score. 
• Gift used for down payment despite the presence of good assets. 
 



:


straw buyer
straw buyer ar loan applic who mortgag fraud perpetr us to obtain home loan
but who have no intent to occupi the properti thei ar bui or to pai back the loan
perpetr often us straw buyer to hide the ident of the true borrow that did not
qualifi for the mortgag
financi institut fraud financi transact
1922 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow red flag mai occur in a straw borrow transact
at close discov that the check is from someon other than the parti to the
contract
borrow resid in differ state than purchas properti which is describ as a
primari resid
quit claim deed is us veri close to loan close
invest properti repres as owneroccupi
a thirdparti sign on the borrow behalf
name ad to purchas contract
parti to the transact ar relat
there is no sale agent involv
there ar indic that the properti seller default
exist of a high fico score
gift us for down payment despit the presenc of good asset
