2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Seller-Assistance Scams


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Seller-Assistance Scams 
Seller-assistance schemes are more likely to occur when homes sales have declined and 
sellers are motivated to sell. These schemes are based on inflated appraisals. After the buyer 
obtains an inflated mortgage and purchases a home at the inflated value, the seller gives the 
buyer a rebate. However, the rebate is not disclosed to the lender, and as a result, the lender 
loaned more money than the property used to secure the loan was worth. If the buyer 
defaults, which generally happens, the lender cannot sell the property and recover the loaned 
money.  
 
In addition to the red flags associated with appraisal fraud noted above, the following 
triggers may indicate the existence of seller assistance scams:  
• The seller is desperate to sell the property. 
• The contract appears to be for substantially more than it is worth. 
• The buyer has already selected the appraiser. 
• The buyer insists on using a specific appraiser. 
• The sale price reflects property appreciation in an area where property values are 
declining. 
 



:


sellerassist scam
sellerassist scheme ar more like to occur when home sale have declin and
seller ar motiv to sell these scheme ar base on inflat apprais after the buyer
obtain an inflat mortgag and purchas a home at the inflat valu the seller give the
buyer a rebat howev the rebat is not disclos to the lender and as a result the lender
loan more monei than the properti us to secur the loan wa worth if the buyer
default which gener happen the lender cannot sell the properti and recov the loan
monei
in addit to the red flag associ with apprais fraud note abov the follow
trigger mai indic the exist of seller assist scam
the seller is desper to sell the properti
the contract appear to be for substanti more than it is worth
the buyer ha alreadi select the apprais
the buyer insist on us a specif apprais
the sale price reflect properti appreci in an area where properti valu ar
declin
