2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/New Account Fraud Schemes/Personal Accounts


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Personal Accounts 
No account should be opened without satisfactory identification, such as: 
• A locally issued driver’s license with a photograph  
• A passport or alien registration card, together with: 
? A college photo identification card 
? A major credit card (verify the current status) 
? An employer identification card 
? An out-of-area driver’s license 
? A current utility bill from the customer’s place of residence (e.g., gas, electricity, 
telephone) 
 
Consider the customer’s residence or place of busi ness. If it is not in the area served by the 
bank or branch, ask why the customer is opening an account at that location. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s residence or place of employment, thanking the 
customer for opening the account. Disconnected phone service or no record of employment 
warrant further investigation.  
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should  
be questioned. 
 
For large accounts, ask the customer for a prior bank reference and write a letter to the bank 
asking about the customer. 
 
Check with service bureaus for indications that the customer has been involved in 
questionable activities such as kiting incidents and NSF situations. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.933 
The identity of a customer can be established through an existing relationship with the 
institution, such as some type of loan or other account relationship. 
  



:


person account
no account should be open without satisfactori identif such as
a local issu driver licens with a photograph
a passport or alien registr card togeth with
a colleg photo identif card
a major credit card verifi the current statu
an employ identif card
an outofarea driver licens
a current util bill from the custom place of resid eg ga electr
telephon
consid the custom resid or place of busi ness if it is not in the area serv by the
bank or branch ask why the custom is open an account at that locat
follow up with call to the custom resid or place of employ thank the
custom for open the account disconnect phone servic or no record of employ
warrant further investig
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should
be question
for larg account ask the custom for a prior bank refer and write a letter to the bank
ask about the custom
check with servic bureau for indic that the custom ha been involv in
question activ such as kite incid and nsf situat
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1933
the ident of a custom can be establish through an exist relationship with the
institut such as some type of loan or other account relationship
