2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes/Business Audits and Other Controls


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Business Audits and Other Controls 
Every firm, of course, must have written policies and procedures for wire transactions. In 
addition, fraud examiners or auditors should conduct unannounced audits of those 
transactions. Following are other examples of wire transfer controls. 
• Make sure the person authorizing the wire transfer isn’t the individual who orders it. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.936                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Require those ordering transfers to have secure passwords. 
• Maintain and keep a current list of those ordering wire transfers, and a log of  
all transfers. 
• Require vacations of persons who handle wire transfers. 
• Require that reconciliations of accounts affected by wire transfers be performed by 
persons not involved with the wire transfer process. 
• Keep all confidential information about firms’ accounts and wire transfers in safe rooms 
secured with locks. Give computer key cards to these rooms to authorized personnel 
only. Shred trash. 
 
Businesses frequently perform vendor audits, but often neglect to audit their bank’s wire 
transfer controls. A fraud examiner should evaluate these areas. 
• Pick a sample of transactions and review the log of the calls made back to the banking 
points to verify their authenticity (You may listen to the tape recording of the actual 
authorization to ensure compliance with call-back rules.) 
• Review documentation of past wire transfer activity from bank statements or bank 
online transaction history for a daily debit and credit match of each transaction. 
• Obtain written confirmations of transactions  from the wire transfer provider to 
determine the timeliness of their receipt by your firm. 
• Promptly reconcile problems caused by the usual custom of ending all wire transfers for 
a day in the mid-afternoon. (Some customers believe they should receive credit and 
interest on funds received at the end of a day. However, wire transfers made after the 
afternoon closing time aren’t credi ted until the next business day.) 
 



:


busi audit and other control
everi firm of cours must have written polici and procedur for wire transact in
addit fraud examin or auditor should conduct unannounc audit of those
transact follow ar other exampl of wire transfer control
make sure the person author the wire transfer isnt the individu who order it
financi institut fraud financi transact
1936 2011 fraud examin manual
requir those order transfer to have secur password
maintain and keep a current list of those order wire transfer and a log of
all transfer
requir vacat of person who handl wire transfer
requir that reconcili of account affect by wire transfer be perform by
person not involv with the wire transfer process
keep all confidenti inform about firm account and wire transfer in safe room
secur with lock give comput kei card to these room to author personnel
onli shred trash
busi frequent perform vendor audit but often neglect to audit their bank wire
transfer control a fraud examin should evalu these area
pick a sampl of transact and review the log of the call made back to the bank
point to verifi their authent you mai listen to the tape record of the actual
author to ensur complianc with callback rule
review document of past wire transfer activ from bank statement or bank
onlin transact histori for a daili debit and credit match of each transact
obtain written confirm of transact from the wire transfer provid to
determin the timeli of their receipt by your firm
promptli reconcil problem caus by the usual custom of end all wire transfer for
a dai in the midafternoon some custom believ thei should receiv credit and
interest on fund receiv at the end of a dai howev wire transfer made after the
afternoon close time arent credi ted until the next busi dai
