2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes/Bank Audits


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Bank Audits 
Financial institutions should ensure the following safeguards when transferring funds: 
• Provide customers with unique codes that are required to authorize or order wire 
transfers. 
• Maintain and update lists of employees authorized to perform wire transfer transactions. 
• Compile audit trails of incoming and outgoing wire transactions, as well as the employee 
responsible for each portion of the transaction. 
• Review all wire transfer transactions at the end of each day to ensure that the original 
transfer instructions were executed correctly. 
• Make sure the businesses to which the funds are transferred are contacted to ensure 
authenticity of fund transfer requests. If the businesses are contacted by phone, the 
phone numbers used should be the original numbers given by the customers when the 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.937 
accounts were opened and not the phone numbers provided by the callers who 
requested the transfers.  
• Don’t execute wire transfers solely from faxed instructions. Again, verify authenticity by 
phoning the original numbers given by the customers when the accounts were opened 
and not the numbers provided by the callers who requested the transfers.  
• Require that all accounts affected by wire transfers be reconciled by bank employees not 
involved with the wire process. 
• Ensure the in-house wire operations manual is available only to authorized personnel 
and secured when not in use — especially after hours. Cleaning crew employees could 
help themselves to client pass codes and other confidential information. 
• Record all incoming and outgoing calls for wire transfer instructions.  
• Carefully screen wire transfer personnel applicants. 
• Reassign to other departments wire transfer employees who have given notice that they 
are resigning but still have some time left with the company.  
• Require all employees involved in the transfer of funds to take at least five consecutive 
days of vacation each year; assign their duti es only to other transfer department staff 
members during their absence. 
• Make sure bank employees never disclose sensitive information over the telephone  
until the caller’s identity and authorizati on have been verified to the customer 
information file.  
• Separate duties among wire employees who transmit or receive requests for funds. These 
employees shouldn’t also verify the accuracy of the transactions. 
• Train employees on proper internal controls, fraud awareness, and the importance  
of protecting information. Share alerts issued by government agencies and  
professional groups.  
 
 



:


bank audit
financi institut should ensur the follow safeguard when transfer fund
provid custom with uniqu code that ar requir to author or order wire
transfer
maintain and updat list of employe author to perform wire transfer transact
compil audit trail of incom and outgo wire transact as well as the employe
respons for each portion of the transact
review all wire transfer transact at the end of each dai to ensur that the origin
transfer instruct were execut correctli
make sure the busi to which the fund ar transfer ar contact to ensur
authent of fund transfer request if the busi ar contact by phone the
phone number us should be the origin number given by the custom when the
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1937
account were open and not the phone number provid by the caller who
request the transfer
dont execut wire transfer sole from fax instruct again verifi authent by
phone the origin number given by the custom when the account were open
and not the number provid by the caller who request the transfer
requir that all account affect by wire transfer be reconcil by bank employe not
involv with the wire process
ensur the inhous wire oper manual is avail onli to author personnel
and secur when not in us especi after hour clean crew employe could
help themselv to client pass code and other confidenti inform
record all incom and outgo call for wire transfer instruct
carefulli screen wire transfer personnel applic
reassign to other depart wire transfer employe who have given notic that thei
ar resign but still have some time left with the compani
requir all employe involv in the transfer of fund to take at least five consecut
dai of vacat each year assign their duti es onli to other transfer depart staff
member dure their absenc
make sure bank employe never disclos sensit inform over the telephon
until the caller ident and authorizati on have been verifi to the custom
inform file
separ duti among wire employe who transmit or receiv request for fund these
employe shouldnt also verifi the accuraci of the transact
train employe on proper intern control fraud awar and the import
of protect inform share alert issu by govern agenc and
profession group
