2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Check Fraud 
Check fraud is one of the fastest-growing problems affecting the nation’s financial system,  
producing estimated yearly losses of up to $20 billion. Not only is the dollar amount 
involved in check fraud increasing yearly, the complexity of fraud tools is growing as well. 
With increased sophistication in laser printers, more accurate color copiers and desktop 
publishing capabilities, duplicating and forging checks has become more accurate and thus 
more difficult to detect.  
 
Due to demands of law enforcement, prosecutors fail to pursue 75 percent of bank check 
fraud cases. According to the U.S. Government Accountability Office, in large cities where a 
majority of resources are used to prosecute violent crime the percentage rises to 90 percent. 
Law enforcement officials may neglect reports of check fraud, feeling that businesses ought 
to be more vigilant in detecting bad checks. Many merchants have tried to use the police and 
prosecutors as check collection agencies; therefore, law enforcement and prosecutors are 
often not eager to pursue these cases. Many bad-check-passers are constantly on the move, 
as well, making prosecution even more difficult. 
 
The best solution for financial institutions and merchants, then, is to educate employees to 
recognize forged and fraudulent checks and the schemes behind them. Merchants and 
financial institutions should have a strict check acceptance policy with which all employees 
are familiar. When accepting checks, employees should always ask for identification and 
make sure it is valid. Many check passers mollify store personnel by showing them a small 
laminated rectangular document with a picture. After looking at several hundred of these, 
most employees tend not to scrutinize them. Check passers count on this. It is important for 
employees to examine each piece of identification closely every time they are presented 
 with one. 
 
Employers must also watch for behavior among employees that could be red flags of inside 
check fraud. Dissatisfaction with job, pay rate, or home life; a lack of recognition or lavish 
lifestyle; or a problem with gambling, alcohol, or drugs are indications that an employee may 
be committing internal fraud. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1002                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


check fraud
check fraud is on of the fastestgrow problem affect the nation financi system
produc estim yearli loss of up to 20 billion not onli is the dollar amount
involv in check fraud increas yearli the complex of fraud tool is grow as well
with increas sophist in laser printer more accur color copier and desktop
publish capabl duplic and forg check ha becom more accur and thu
more difficult to detect
due to demand of law enforc prosecutor fail to pursu 75 percent of bank check
fraud case accord to the us govern account offic in larg citi where a
major of resourc ar us to prosecut violent crime the percentag rise to 90 percent
law enforc offici mai neglect report of check fraud feel that busi ought
to be more vigil in detect bad check mani merchant have tri to us the polic and
prosecutor as check collect agenc therefor law enforc and prosecutor ar
often not eager to pursu these case mani badcheckpass ar constantli on the move
as well make prosecut even more difficult
the best solut for financi institut and merchant then is to educ employe to
recogn forg and fraudul check and the scheme behind them merchant and
financi institut should have a strict check accept polici with which all employe
ar familiar when accept check employe should alwai ask for identif and
make sure it is valid mani check passer mollifi store personnel by show them a small
lamin rectangular document with a pictur after look at sever hundr of these
most employe tend not to scrutin them check passer count on thi it is import for
employe to examin each piec of identif close everi time thei ar present
with on
employ must also watch for behavior among employe that could be red flag of insid
check fraud dissatisfact with job pai rate or home life a lack of recognit or lavish
lifestyl or a problem with gambl alcohol or drug ar indic that an employe mai
be commit intern fraud
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11002 2011 fraud examin manual
