2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Paperhangers


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Paperhangers 
Paperhangers are the experts of phony check passing. They frequently pick a particular 
establishment or store and observe its security methods. Any store that scrutinizes check 
writers’ identification is not a good target for a paperhanger. However, they will observe and 
select the least experienced or most lackadaisical of store employees to whom to pass the 
check. The paperhanger will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transaction and make 
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchase. In some cases, the 
checks being written are counterfeit; however, in other cases the checks are purposefully 
being written on a closed account. A variation of this scam is making a fraudulent deposit at 
a bank and asking for cash back.  
 
These experts will go to great lengths to blend in with the clientele. Standing out in a crowd 
is not to their advantage. Women are often quite good as paperhangers. A mother with 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1004                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
crying children paying with a check is usually not the profile one expects for a bad- 
check-passer.  
 



:


paperhang
paperhang ar the expert of phoni check pass thei frequent pick a particular
establish or store and observ it secur method ani store that scrutin check
writer identif is not a good target for a paperhang howev thei will observ and
select the least experienc or most lackadais of store employe to whom to pass the
check the paperhang will then ask the clerk for cash back from the transact and make
the check out for an amount greater than the price of the purchas in some case the
check be written ar counterfeit howev in other case the check ar purposefulli
be written on a close account a variat of thi scam is make a fraudul deposit at
a bank and ask for cash back
these expert will go to great length to blend in with the clientel stand out in a crowd
is not to their advantag women ar often quit good as paperhang a mother with
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11004 2011 fraud examin manual
cry children pai with a check is usual not the profil on expect for a bad
checkpass
