2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Check Fraud/Check Fraud Prevention and Investigation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Check Fraud Prevention and Investigation 
Since the Federal Reserve’s Regulation CC was implemented, mandating accelerated 
availability of customers’ funds, check fraud at banks has increased. Most bank customers’ 
funds are available for withdrawal a day after deposit, leaving the bank little time to verify 
the validity of the transaction. Regulation CC, however, allows banks two days to make 
funds available. Most banks provide next-day withdrawal in order to stay competitive. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1010                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Additionally, special security printing techniques have been developed to make 
counterfeiting blank checks more difficult. One of the features is the use of a pattern of 
colors that is difficult to separate even with special cameras, filters, and film. Another 
technique used is scrambled indicia printing, which is a seemingly random pattern of tiny 
colored dots printed on the paper. Using a colored filter to view the check will make a word 
or pattern develop.  
 
Still another technique, which is also used by credit card issuers, is to print a “micro-line” on 
the check, which appears as a solid line when viewed normally. But using a magnifying glass 
will show that the line is actually very small words or letters, which are very difficult to 
recreate with the normal printing process. Other security measures include using a three 
dimensional hologram, which is easily identifiable by the human eye, but is impossible to 
reproduce via ordinary copying or printing. Some checks have a security seal on the back of 
the check that is visible when held up to a light. Reproductions, even good ones, will not 
have a seal.  
 



:


check fraud prevent and investig
sinc the feder reserv regul cc wa implement mandat acceler
avail of custom fund check fraud at bank ha increas most bank custom
fund ar avail for withdraw a dai after deposit leav the bank littl time to verifi
the valid of the transact regul cc howev allow bank two dai to make
fund avail most bank provid nextdai withdraw in order to stai competit
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11010 2011 fraud examin manual
addition special secur print techniqu have been develop to make
counterfeit blank check more difficult on of the featur is the us of a pattern of
color that is difficult to separ even with special camera filter and film anoth
techniqu us is scrambl indicia print which is a seemingli random pattern of tini
color dot print on the paper us a color filter to view the check will make a word
or pattern develop
still anoth techniqu which is also us by credit card issuer is to print a microlin on
the check which appear as a solid line when view normal but us a magnifi glass
will show that the line is actual veri small word or letter which ar veri difficult to
recreat with the normal print process other secur measur includ us a three
dimension hologram which is easili identifi by the human ey but is imposs to
reproduc via ordinari copi or print some check have a secur seal on the back of
the check that is visibl when held up to a light reproduct even good on will not
have a seal
