2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Credit Card Fraud/Counterfeit Cards


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Counterfeit Cards 
Another type of bankcard fraud involves the illegal counterfeiting of credit cards. Known as 
“white plastic” cards, this scheme utilizes credit-card-sized plastic with embossed account 
numbers and names. This scheme works in conjunction with a corrupt and collusive 
merchant or a merchant’s employee. Other counterfeit cards are manufactured from scratch 
using high speed printing facilities and used in association with organized crime groups. 
Manufacturing facilities have been traced to the Far East. 
 
Counterfeiting operations are centered in Taiwan, China, and Hong Kong, where the 
specialty is producing the holograms and magnetic strips that appear on many cards. Forged 
holograms are smuggled into the U.S. and Canada by ring members from Asia and 
distributed throughout both countries. A substantial amount of them end up in California, 
where most of the Asian counterfeiting operations in the U.S. are located. Not surprisingly, 
California, notably Orange County, experiences more credit card fraud than any area in  
the country.  
 
The actual counterfeiting process has been immeasurably eased by technology that allows for 
more accurate duplication. Duplicating legitimate cards is still an intricate operation, 
however. Magnetic strips, numbers, holograms, and logos must all appear authentic. 
Desktop computers, embossers, tipping foil, and laminators are common tools in the 
reproduction process. Perhaps most difficult of all to accurately reproduce, however, is the 
hologram. Most phony holograms can be sold for between $5 and $15. True holograms use 
a “lenticular refraction” process; counterfeits are generally only reflected materials, usually a 
foil with an image stamped on it. These decals are attached to the surface of the card, rather 
than fixed into the plastic, as is the case with legitimate cards. Some holograms do not 
change colors, as legitimate ones do, when viewed from various angles. Counterfeit credit 
cards are the most damaging scheme of those mentioned here. However, with the increasing 
use of chips inside the cards and the addition of a PIN (Personal Identification Number), 
counterfeiting cards has decreased significantly as a method of bank card fraud in the U.S., 
U.K., and other countries implementing this technology. 
 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1017 



:


counterfeit card
anoth type of bankcard fraud involv the illeg counterfeit of credit card known as
white plastic card thi scheme util creditcards plastic with emboss account
number and name thi scheme work in conjunct with a corrupt and collus
merchant or a merchant employe other counterfeit card ar manufactur from scratch
us high speed print facil and us in associ with organ crime group
manufactur facil have been trace to the far east
counterfeit oper ar center in taiwan china and hong kong where the
specialti is produc the hologram and magnet strip that appear on mani card forg
hologram ar smuggl into the us and canada by ring member from asia and
distribut throughout both countri a substanti amount of them end up in california
where most of the asian counterfeit oper in the us ar locat not surprisingli
california notabl orang counti experi more credit card fraud than ani area in
the countri
the actual counterfeit process ha been immeasur eas by technolog that allow for
more accur duplic duplic legitim card is still an intric oper
howev magnet strip number hologram and logo must all appear authent
desktop comput emboss tip foil and lamin ar common tool in the
reproduct process perhap most difficult of all to accur reproduc howev is the
hologram most phoni hologram can be sold for between 5 and 15 true hologram us
a lenticular refract process counterfeit ar gener onli reflect materi usual a
foil with an imag stamp on it these decal ar attach to the surfac of the card rather
than fix into the plastic as is the case with legitim card some hologram do not
chang color as legitim on do when view from variou angl counterfeit credit
card ar the most damag scheme of those mention here howev with the increas
us of chip insid the card and the addit of a pin person identif number
counterfeit card ha decreas significantli as a method of bank card fraud in the us
uk and other countri implement thi technolog
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11017
