2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Credit Card Company Security Initiatives


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Credit Card Company Security Initiatives 
Both Visa and MasterCard have initiated security measures to help combat online theft. The 
Verified by Visa program protects merchants from fraud-related chargebacks on all Visa 
personal debit and credit card transactions, even when processing transactions from non-
 participating issuers. Verified by Visa also protects consumers by requiring a password in the 
Verified by Visa window during purchases with participating online stores, helping ensure 
that no one else can use their Visa card onlin e. At online stores not yet participating in 
Verified by Visa, the Visa credit card will continue to work the same as usual. Additionally, 
Visa works alongside financial institutions and merchants to continually monitor consumer’s 
accounts to detect suspicious or unusual activity. By taking these steps, Visa is able to work 
proactively to reduce fraudulent transactions. 
 
Here are some of the red flags that may indicate fraudulent activity:  
• Shipping address is different from the billing address, or the shipping address has 
suddenly changed.  
• Unusually large purchase compared to normal purchase patterns for the account in 
question.  
• Change in name on the account.  
• Change in date of birth or Social Security number.  
 
MasterCard’s SecureCode allows credit card holders to register and set up their own private 
SecureCode number. Users of SecureCode will be automatically prompted by their financial 
institution at checkout to provide their SecureCode each time they make a purchase with a 
participating online merchant. The SecureCode is quickly confirmed by the financial 
institution and then the purchase is completed. The SecureCode will never be shared with 
the merchant. It’s just like entering a PIN at an ATM. MasterCard has also initiated the 
PayPass system in which cardholders can make purchases with a simple tap, rather than 
swiping or dipping their card. This adds a level of security since the card or PayPass device 
never leaves the cardholder’s hand. 
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1028                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


credit card compani secur initi
both visa and mastercard have initi secur measur to help combat onlin theft the
verifi by visa program protect merchant from fraudrel chargeback on all visa
person debit and credit card transact even when process transact from non
particip issuer verifi by visa also protect consum by requir a password in the
verifi by visa window dure purchas with particip onlin store help ensur
that no on els can us their visa card onlin e at onlin store not yet particip in
verifi by visa the visa credit card will continu to work the same as usual addition
visa work alongsid financi institut and merchant to continu monitor consum
account to detect suspici or unusu activ by take these step visa is abl to work
proactiv to reduc fraudul transact
here ar some of the red flag that mai indic fraudul activ
ship address is differ from the bill address or the ship address ha
suddenli chang
unusu larg purchas compar to normal purchas pattern for the account in
question
chang in name on the account
chang in date of birth or social secur number
mastercard securecod allow credit card holder to regist and set up their own privat
securecod number user of securecod will be automat prompt by their financi
institut at checkout to provid their securecod each time thei make a purchas with a
particip onlin merchant the securecod is quickli confirm by the financi
institut and then the purchas is complet the securecod will never be share with
the merchant it just like enter a pin at an atm mastercard ha also initi the
paypass system in which cardhold can make purchas with a simpl tap rather than
swipe or dip their card thi add a level of secur sinc the card or paypass devic
never leav the cardhold hand
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11028 2011 fraud examin manual
