2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Prevention and Detection of Credit Card Fraud/Physical Security Features/MASTERCARD CARD FEATURES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


MASTERCARD CARD FEATURES 
• A large “MC” is visible under ultraviol et light for MasterCard. The “MC” security 
character is no longer permitted on newly issued cards (effective June 1, 2006), but may 
continue to appear on cards through June 2010. 
• All cards must include the full-color MasterCard Brand Mark. This mark may be below 
or above the Global Hologram. Merchants should be aware that the MasterCard card 
design and the MasterCard Brand Mark may be oriented vertically. 
• The hologram (whether on global or debit cards) can be located on the front or back of 
the card based on the design/type unless HoloMag tape is used. 
• MasterCard’s embossed account numbers begin with a 5 and contain 16 digits. The 
number must be clear and uniform in size and spacing and must appear on one line. 
• The first four numbers of the account number must be the same digits as those printed 
directly below (pre-printed BIN). 
• The front of the card must include a valid expiration date. 
• The signature panel located on the back of the card must include the word “MasterCard” 
printed in multicolors at a 45 degree angle. The last four digits of the account number 
must be printed in reverse italics in the upper right corner of the signature panel (this is 
required as of June 1, 2006, prior to this the reverse italics could be found at the upper 
center of the signature panel). 
• Magnetic tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no signs of 
tampering. HoloMag tape may be used in place of the traditional magnetic tape. 
• The HoloMag tape or MasterCard hologram must  be included on the back of the card if 
it cannot be found on the front. 
• CVC2 number (three-digit validation number) must be printed in reverse italics to the 
right of the last four digits of the account number. As of June 1, 2006, the CVC2 
number was required to be printed in reverse italics in an adjacent white box to the right 
of the signature panel. 
 
For more information about MasterCard’s security features, visit their website at: 
http://www.mastercard.com/us/merchant/security/what_can_do/card_features.html.  
 
Check and Credit Card Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1030                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


mastercard card featur
a larg mc is visibl under ultraviol et light for mastercard the mc secur
charact is no longer permit on newli issu card effect june 1 2006 but mai
continu to appear on card through june 2010
all card must includ the fullcolor mastercard brand mark thi mark mai be below
or abov the global hologram merchant should be awar that the mastercard card
design and the mastercard brand mark mai be orient vertic
the hologram whether on global or debit card can be locat on the front or back of
the card base on the designtyp unless holomag tape is us
mastercard emboss account number begin with a 5 and contain 16 digit the
number must be clear and uniform in size and space and must appear on on line
the first four number of the account number must be the same digit as those print
directli below preprint bin
the front of the card must includ a valid expir date
the signatur panel locat on the back of the card must includ the word mastercard
print in multicolor at a 45 degre angl the last four digit of the account number
must be print in revers ital in the upper right corner of the signatur panel thi is
requir as of june 1 2006 prior to thi the revers ital could be found at the upper
center of the signatur panel
magnet tape must be present and appear smooth and straight with no sign of
tamper holomag tape mai be us in place of the tradit magnet tape
the holomag tape or mastercard hologram must be includ on the back of the card if
it cannot be found on the front
cvc2 number threedigit valid number must be print in revers ital to the
right of the last four digit of the account number as of june 1 2006 the cvc2
number wa requir to be print in revers ital in an adjac white box to the right
of the signatur panel
for more inform about mastercard secur featur visit their websit at
httpwwwmastercardcomusmerchantsecuritywhatcandocardfeatureshtml
check and credit card fraud financi transact
11030 2011 fraud examin manual
