2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CHECK AND CREDIT CARD FRAUD/Electronic Bill Payment and Person-to-Person Payments/Access Device


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Check and Credit Card Fraud


:


Access Device 
An “access device” includes a card, code, or other means of access to a customer’s account 
for the purpose of initiating electronic fund transfers. These include debit cards, personal 
identification numbers (PINs), telephone transfer and bill payment codes, and other means 
that a consumer may use to initiate an electronic fund transfer from his account. A 
consumer’s account is considered an asset account, such as a demand deposit or savings 
account, established for personal, family, or household purposes. A credit card is not 
considered an access device since it provides access to a credit line rather than to a 
consumer’s account. The term “access device” does not include a check or draft used to 
capture to MICR encoding to initiate a one-time ACH debit. For example, if a customer 
authorizes a single ACH debit from his account by giving a check to the merchant so they 
can capture the routing, account, and serial numbers to initiate the debit, the check is not an 
access device. If the customer, however, provides a payee with a check, or with information 
from a check that is physically retained by the consumer, in order to allow the payee to 
capture routing, account, and serial number information, the result transfer does constitute 
an electronic fund transfer.  
 
When an access devise is necessary to instruct a financial institution to perform a transfer, 
the financial institution will be able to claim that it was authorized to debit or credit a 
consumer’s account only if the transfer was initiated through use of an “accepted” access 
device. An access device will qualify for this status only if the devise was issued to a person: 
• Who requested and received it. 
• Who signed and used it. 
• Who authorized another to use the access device. 
• For the purpose of transferring money between accounts or obtaining money, property, 
labor, or services. 
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1037 
If a consumer uses an accepted access device to initiate a transfer, the EFTA will cover the 
transaction, even though a bank employee has intervened to complete the transaction. 
Assume, for instance, that Smith wishes to transfer $100 from her checking account to her 
savings account. She asks the teller at her bank to perform the transaction. The teller 
requests that Smith enter her PIN into a card-reading device at the teller’s station. If the PIN 
is used to initiate the transfer, the transaction is an electronic fund transfer. 
 



:


access devic
an access devic includ a card code or other mean of access to a custom account
for the purpos of initi electron fund transfer these includ debit card person
identif number pin telephon transfer and bill payment code and other mean
that a consum mai us to initi an electron fund transfer from hi account a
consum account is consid an asset account such as a demand deposit or save
account establish for person famili or household purpos a credit card is not
consid an access devic sinc it provid access to a credit line rather than to a
consum account the term access devic doe not includ a check or draft us to
captur to micr encod to initi a onetim ach debit for exampl if a custom
author a singl ach debit from hi account by give a check to the merchant so thei
can captur the rout account and serial number to initi the debit the check is not an
access devic if the custom howev provid a paye with a check or with inform
from a check that is physic retain by the consum in order to allow the paye to
captur rout account and serial number inform the result transfer doe constitut
an electron fund transfer
when an access devis is necessari to instruct a financi institut to perform a transfer
the financi institut will be abl to claim that it wa author to debit or credit a
consum account onli if the transfer wa initi through us of an accept access
devic an access devic will qualifi for thi statu onli if the devis wa issu to a person
who request and receiv it
who sign and us it
who author anoth to us the access devic
for the purpos of transfer monei between account or obtain monei properti
labor or servic
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11037
if a consum us an accept access devic to initi a transfer the efta will cover the
transact even though a bank employe ha interven to complet the transact
assum for instanc that smith wish to transfer 100 from her check account to her
save account she ask the teller at her bank to perform the transact the teller
request that smith enter her pin into a cardread devic at the teller station if the pin
is us to initi the transfer the transact is an electron fund transfer
